A cess of 1-15% is levied on cars to create a corpus to compensate States for loss of revenue from GST implementation.Sport Utility Vechicles, mid-sized, large, and luxury cars will cost more as the GST (Goods and Services Tax) Council has approved a proposal to hike cess on them to 25% from 15%. Under the new GST regime, these cars attract the top tax rate of 28%. On top of this, a cess of 1-15% is levied on them to create a corpus to compensate the States for loss of revenue from GST implementation.The reason for this, according to the GST Council’s Fitment Committee, was that the post-GST tax incidence on motor vehicles across most categories was significantly lower than the pre-GST tax.“The GST Council... recommended that the Central Government may move legislative amendments required for increase in the maximum ceiling of cess leviable on motor vehicles falling under headings 8702 and 8703, including SUVs, to 25% instead of the present 15%,” the government said in a release. “However, the decision on when to raise the actual cess leviable on the same will be taken by the GST Council in due course.”
‘Highly disappointed’“We are highly disappointed with the decision,” Roland Folger, MD & CEO, Mercedes-Benz India, said in a statement. “We believe this will be a strong deterrent to the growth of luxury cars in this country. As a leading luxury car maker, this will also affect our future plans of expansion under the ‘Make in India’ initiative.”“With this hike in cess, we expect the volumes of the luxury industry to decelerate, thus offsetting any growth in the potential revenue generation that could have come with the estimated volume growth,” Mr. Folger added.The GST Council, however, argued that the hike in the cess was justified as it only brought the current tax incidence in line with what existed before GST.“The difference in tax incidence calculated earlier and now is primarily on account of the fact that earlier the value based on which the tax incidence was estimated was inclusive of excise duty, while it should have been value net of VAT as well as excise duties,” a GST Council document reviewed by The Hindu said.“Net of 28% GST, to maintain the pre-GST tax incidence, the highest compensation cess rate required will be 26.5%, based on tax incidence estimated with reference to assessable value for excise duty and dealer’s margin,” the document added. “Further, if the tax incidence is estimated on value not including dealer’s margin, the maximum rate for compensation cess will increase accordingly.”
States’ compensation“The purpose of the cess is to compensate the States for any loss,” Pratik Jain, Partner and Leader of Indirect Tax at PwC India said. “It might have been better to first see how much loss, if any, is being incurred by the States, before deciding to change the rates of the compensation cess.”When contacted, the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers declined to comment.Vehicles in the categoryCategory 8702 comprises “motor vehicles for the transport of 10 or more persons, including the driver”, while Category 8703 comprises “motor cars and other motor vehicles principally designed for the transport of persons (other than those of heading 8702) including station wagons and racing cars (other than cars for physically handicapped persons)”.The vehicles that fall under these two categories include mid-segment, large cars, SUVs and motor vehicles which can carry more than 10 persons but less than 13.Also, hybrid vehicles with engine capacity of more than 1500 cc and mid segment hybrid cars of less than 1500 cc fall in the category.The highest pre-GST tax incidence on motor vehicles worked out to about 52-54.72%, to which 2.5% was added on account of the CST, octroi etc. Against this, post-GST, the total tax incidence came to 43%.Prices of most SUVs were cut between ₹ 1.1 lakh and ₹ 3 lakh following the implementation of GST, which subsumed over a dozen Central and State levies from July 1.While all cars attract a peak GST rate of 28%, large motor vehicles, SUVs, mid-segment, large, hybrid cars and hybrid motor vehicles attract a cess of 15% on top of it. Small petrol cars of less than 4 metres and 1200 cc are marked for a cess of 1% while small diesel cars of less than 4 meters and 1500 cc engine are levied a cess of 3%.The cess collected on cars as also tobacco and coal will be used to compensate the revenue loss of the States by implementing the GST. For this, a separate statute has been passed by Parliament. This prescribes the maximum cess rate.And now, to change that cess rate, an amendment to the Schedule to section 8 of the GST (Compensation to a State) Act, 2017 will be needed.(With inputs from PTI)
Destocking, in the run-up to the GST implementation, has severely dented dry cell battery-maker Eveready Industries India Ltd.’s first quarter profit. Net profit dropped 39.3% to Rs 13.6 crore. Operating income was 4% lower at 338.8 crore.EIIL sells batteries, flashlights and lighting products, especially LED. It had recently entered the small appliances segment and is in the process of demerging its packet tea business.
Margin impact
The ‘GST-impact’ was most severely felt in the battery segment where destocking by trade channels translated to a 10% drop in volumes, EIIL said. It has a more than 50% share of the dry cell battery market contributing to a major share in its turnover. The GST impact led to a 2% drop in margins.In the flashlight segment, the impact was less adverse. This market has many organised players who have become apprehensive about the GST impact and in the long term, EIIL hopes to benefit from the GST roll out although its turnover from this business dropped by 10% in the first quarter, the company said in an information update.Total turnover in the lighting segment remained flat, the company said, adding that the margins from this segment of the business turned positive. Turnover increased in the appliances sector, but the segment is yet to be profitable, with higher incidence of manpower and distribution costs. This has also impacted profits, it is learnt.Eveready, however, held a positive outlook for the current quarter saying that a pick up in demand is indicated and once “all apprehensions relating to the new tax regime were put at rest at rest, demand is expected to return to normalcy by [the] end of this quarter.”It expected the battery and flashlight segments to benefit the most as these segments bear the maximum impact of non-compliance with tax laws by the unorganised players in these segments.EIIL said that the GST impact has mostly been revenue-neutral for the company. A normal monsoon also bodes well for EIIL.There was barely any space for more than one person in the cramped mud-walled room as two handlooms occupied most of it. Basudeb Das, 76, whose family is engaged in weaving traditional cotton saris — known as ‘taant’ in Bengal — was staring blankly at the wall on a Saturday afternoon. Before the Goods and Services Tax (GST) was introduced in July 1, the room witnessed hectic activities of weaving saris and was filled with the clattering sound of handlooms.But with the confusion whether there is any GST on ‘taant’ saris business for these weavers has almost stopped for about a month. However, five per cent GST has been imposed on cotton and yarn, raw materials for ‘taant’ saris. Mr. Das is one among at least 8,000 weavers in the Rajbalhat area in Hooghly district’s Jangipara block whose livelihood has been jeopardised due to the confusion regarding GST. Weavers in other districts such as Nadia, Bankura and Purba Bardhaman are facing a similar crisis. According to the Handloom Census of India (2009-10) there are 4.07 lakh households in Bengal involved in the sector.“The producers (sari merchants) — who provide the weavers with cotton yarn and other raw materials for the sari and then sell the finished product — have nearly stopped giving us any work due to the confusion about GST,” Mr. Das told The Hindu. Earlier Mr. Das used earn about ₹600 a week but after the introduction of GST it has come down to ₹200 a week. He along with his ailing wife and a daughter are now struggling to meet both ends meet.According to the producers they are yet to get any idea whether there is any GST imposed on ‘taant’ saris. Moreover, they do not have the required infrastructure for the billing process under GST norms. “We are totally clueless whether there is any GST on ‘taant’ saris as well as the process of billing under GST,” one of the producers of ‘taant’ saris in Rajbalhat Susanta Sil said. He also said that as a result it had become “extremely difficult” for them to sell the saris at markets wholesale markets in Kolkata’s Burrabazar as well as to buyers from other Bihar and Odisha as the buyers were asking for “bills prepared as GST norms.”For the weavers in Nadia district the situation is equally grim. The district is known for the famous variant of ‘taant’ sari namely ‘Jamdani’ and ‘Tangail’. While the name ‘Jamdani’ is derived from Persian word ‘Jam’ meaning a cup and ‘dani’ meaning ‘container’, ‘Tangail’ originates from a district of the same name in Bangladesh. “We can’t even buy yarn without going through the complicated billing process under GST. If such a situation continues I will have no option but to shut down my business,” said Asit Das, a weaver from district’s Shantipur town.When contacted Bengal’s Minister of State for the Micro, Small, Medium Enterprises and Textile Swapan Debnth only said: “The weavers in Bengal are facing severe inconveniences due to the confusion surrounding GST.”
