TVS Logistics Services Ltd., (TVS LSL), India-based multinational third-party logistics service provider, has drawn up aggressive growth plans for Indian businesses as Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime offers a huge opportunity.“Prior to the implementation of GST regime, we were either viewed as labour contractor or transporter. We did not have chance to offer our services in India,” said R. Dinesh, managing director, TVS LSL. “Now, we are seen as supply chain partner. Post GST, we see a huge opportunity. We can bring global capabilities to India.”While announcing the appointment of R. Shankar as the chief executive officer of Indian operations, Mr. Dinesh said they have set an ambitious target for the Indian operations to hit $1 billion revenue mark by March 2021.“With our global revenue already crossing $1 billion, we are now setting our focus firmly on India operations to achieve this ambitious target. This year, we will be doing revenue of ₹2,500 crore to ₹2,700 crore and our aim is to touch ₹7,000 crore by 2020-21. For the last five years, the Indian business has been growing above 30% compound annual growth rate,” he said.Elaborating further, Mr. Dinesh said they will be focussing more on non-automobile sector such as telecom, technology and FMCG among others. Five years back, automobile sector contributed to 96% of revenue and this would be scaled down to 30% by March 2021.Having done couple of acquisitions in the past, Mr. Dinesh said they would strive to achieve the target mostly through organic route. “Currently, Indian operations accounts for 30% of revenue and this would go up to 40%. By March 2021, we expect the global revenue to be about ₹20,000 crore,” he said.“To achieve our target, we will offer value added products and differentiated end-to-end solutions to customers, deploy all our niche capabilities and identify potential value in supply chain,” Mr. Shankar said.
As part of the strategy, TVS LSL has established Global Centres of Excellence in the Madurai and U.S., and two more (U.K. and Singapore) will be commissioned soon. The Madurai centre will focus on global technology to build new age apps and solutions, UK centre on contract logistics, USA centre on production and inbound supply chain, Singapore Centre on freight forwarding. Till date, about 200 people have been hired in these centres and it would be ramped up to 500.
Revenue collections from the Goods and Services Tax (GST) ‘technically exceeded’ the government’s target in its first month, with as much as ₹92,283 crore flowing to the exchequer from just 64.4% of taxpayers who were eligible to pay taxes in July and had filed returns by Tuesday morning, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said.“Not many had thought the red line (of adequate revenue following the transition to GST) would be crossed in the first month itself… A more efficient tax system checks evasion,” Mr. Jaitley pointed out, before emphasising that if this trend continued for the year, the government would be comfortable on the revenue front.The last date for filing the first GST returns for July and paying taxes was August 25, while it was August 28 for those who wanted to avail transitional credits.“If we exclude taxpayers who have registered with the GST Network in August and those who have opted for composition, the total number of tax payers required to file returns for July is 59.57 lakh, of which 38.38 lakh have filed returns,” the finance, corporate affairs and defence minister said.Total revenue received from GST for July is ₹92,283 crore, with central GST revenue of ₹14,894 crore, State GST receipts of ₹22,722 crore and Integrated GST receipts at ₹47, 469 crore. Cess receipts, including compensation cess from imports, came to ₹7,198 crore.
‘Target of ₹91,000 crore’:When asked if he was satisfied with the inflows from GST, the minister said as per the Budget’s projections for indirect tax revenue, the Centre’s target for July was about ₹48,000 crore and the overall target for States, assuming a 14% annual growth from their 2015-16 revenues, was about ₹43,000 crore. Together, the revenue target was ₹91,000 crore, which has been surpassed.The minister also said cess collections were to be deducted from the ₹92,283 crore figure as it was earmarked for compensation to States for loss of revenue.“On a sum total basis, we seem to be comfortable. We will have to break up the figures to see if any State has not got (adequate) revenues and the Cess will compensate them,” Mr. Jaitley said.Late filings, which attract a fine of ₹100 per day, are expected to push the GST revenues further up, the finance minister said. About 13.8 lakh firms are yet to complete formalities for migrating to the GST network, while as many as 18.83 lakh new tax payers have been registered with the GSTN till August 29.
