In an interview with MD,said that,"we have seen a lot of pickup in sales post July 15th to 20th because in many states the VAT filing for the previous month closes by 15th or 20th of next month." Edited excerpts:Yes we have seen some significant temporary destock by all trade partners irrespective of category starting from end of May all the way till end of June. We believe that we have lost close to 70 to 80 crores of sales just on account of GST so that add the 25% gross margin, will roughly around 15 to 20 crores of EBITDA loss for us. Apart from that we also had one-time issues because of GST, because of migration and because of certain startup costs in our new plant in Sikkim So one-time GST impact is estimated to be about four crores which includes certain compensation that has to be provisioned in the event of giving compensation to trade for transition loss. We also had one-time expenditure,a total extra cost of about three crores because of Sikkim plant which is just starting. So we will initially be spending more money because the plant is not yet coming to full utilisation levels which we expect to normalise in the next couple of quarters. We also had a three crore impact this is again one time because of e-sop cost because of the change in e-sop expending method because of change from the old accounting standard to Ind AS standard. So the one-time hit because of GST, Sikkim and Ind AS is about 10 to 11 crores and the GST impact of destocking is between 15 to 20 crores. So that is our main roughly the hit.Our gross margins have remained more or less stable. We had a gross margin hit of about 1.3%. So we believe that that is basically the delayed price increases into the market even thought the raw material prices have gone up, many companies have delayed price increases into the market. So that is one thing that we have to correct and the pricing have to be corrected in the next couple of months.I believe so because our gross margins have not been impacted very badly. It has been the fixed cost absorption that has mainly impacted EBITDA margins. We grew by almost 17% to 18% in Q4 last year and that growth decelerated to 1% growth in the next quarter. So obviously that kind of poor growth is not able to absorb all the fixed cost. We had seen a much better number in July so I think for us at least what we decided is because of GST and we did not also push material into the trade because we knew that they will come back asking for compensation because if they will have transition loss. So we decided to wait for the GST storm to tide over and we have started to build in July and there has been good response. So I think most of these are one off. The real impact on the margins is about 1.3% which will continue unless we are able to pass it on to the market.So I think we have seen a lot of pickup in sales post July 15th to 20th because in many states the VAT filing for the previous month closes by 15th or 20th of next month. So post that we have seen huge restocking by trade already start to happen. July numbers are very positive. So I think we expect the loss of the 70 to 80 crores to be recouped in the next six months. So we believe that it will take at least two quarters for the sales to be recouped to the older level. I think a lot of it will come back by September but some of it will also maybe follow into Q3 because we are still fully to understand what is the impact of GST on the traders because there is going to be some confusion for the first two months. So immediately of course there will be a restocking but what I am saying is going forward also we are not sure what are the impacts so I think there are certain quarters which believe that there may be more deeper impact. So sales may take time to come back but July has been pretty good so we are not feeling that it will take very long but maximum two quarters is what we believe that the lost sales will take time to come back.
Small manufacturers in Hosur 's automotive cluster have begun sending missives to original equipment manufacturers and suppliers about working capital shortage due to the introduction of the goods and services tax.These entrepreneurs have to foot a 10 per cent higher tax on products under the new tax regime launched on July 1. They have to set this aside for remittance every month, but payments from clients - who bear the higher tax rate of 28 per cent - usually take 100 days, such businessmen said.“We have represented to Tier I suppliers and even OEMs (original equipment manufacturers) that there is a threat of default,“ said K Velmurugan, managing partner of JIT Auto Comp, a small manufacturer of pressed steel components.Earlier, for raw material worth Rs 1 crore purchased, the components maker would pay Rs 17.5 lakh in a cumulative levy of 17.5 per cent of excise duty and value added tax (VAT). Setting off input tax against an equivalent output levy, he would pay tax only for the degree of value-addition in his manufacturing. Now, under the GST system, he needs to set aside 28 per cent of the proceeds from his component sale, but can claim input credit only to the level of 18 per cent, meaning higher tax outgo. Although it is a car or truck maker bearing the 28 per cent levy, purchase contracts are usually 2-3 months long, putting the pressure of tax remittance on the component maker every month and draining that firm's working capital.Nearly 1,000 manufacturers in the Hosur cluster, supplying to vehicle makers such as Ashok Leyland, TVS Motor, Volvo and Hyundai, have represented their problem in a letter to Union finance minister Arun Jaitley. The effect of working capital crunch was also discussed at a meeting industrialists had with Jaitley and commerce minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Sunday.Ranganath N Krishna, managing director at Grundfos Pumps India, told ET that the disruption in cash flow caused by the GST regime was part of the brainstorming, along with a few anomalies in the tax rates, such as “different taxes on the same product due to the difference in their end use“.
Exporters of garments and made ups like bedsheets and towels will continue to get rebate on certain state levies for three more months as in the pre-Goods and Services Tax ( GST ) regime.Government on Tuesday announced a "transitional arrangement" wherein garments and made ups exporters can claim Remission of State Levies (ROSL) at the rates prior to introduction of GST till September 30.The scheme aims at making exports competitive in the international The scheme aims at making exports competitive in the international market as exporters of made ups get incentives of 3.9 per cent of the value of exported goods.The government in June had slashed the rates under the RoSL Scheme on export of garments and textile made-up articles to 0.39 per cent to be effective from July 1 from 3.9 per cent earlier causing a furore in the two sectors.However, Tuesday\'s announcement will allow exporters the old incentive of 3.9 per cent till September 30.The special scheme for remission of state levies for three years was part of the Rs 6,000 crore package that the government had approved in June last year for employment generation and promotion of exports in the textile and apparel sector.