MUMBAI: Even before the dust around the new accounting system — Ind AS — could settle, auditors are now faced with the impact the Goods and Services Tax GST ) could have on accounting.According to experts, because the treatment of taxes under the GST and the erstwhile tax regime is different, the revenues of companies could get affected."Treatment of GST on the sale of goods is in sharp contrast to that of the excise duty. Under Ind As, the excise duty was considered a tax on manufacture/production and was therefore treated as part of revenue and the cost of manufactured goods," Sumit Seth, partner, Price Waterhouse, said, adding that when a company sells a product or service under the GST, the tax amount collected from the customer would be excluded from the reported revenue as they are remitted to the government in full.According to a recent research, Indians companies saw their revenues jump by about 7% after moving to the Ind AS system. But under GST, they will again see a reduction in their top line, as GST replaces the existing excise-duty tax based on production and will be reported net of revenues. "Although the net income won't be affected, it surely impacts comparability including deciphering various performance ratios such as gross and EBIT margins," Seth pointed out.India moved to new standards — Ind-AS — based on global accounting system IFRS in April 2016.Experts also point out that the compensation paid by companies to its dealers under GST will also be treated differently now. Some companies may agree to pay compensation to its dealers on transition to GST mainly to reimburse them for additional tax burden arising from the higher GST rate vis-à-vis VAT rate, on unsold inventory lying with the dealers as on June 30, 2017."The question that arises is how such payment should be accounted in the Ind AS results. Under Ind AS, it is quite clear that cash consideration given by a seller to a dealer is a reduction of the revenue unless the seller is purchasing separately identifiable goods or services from the dealer," said Seth.
NEW DELHI: India’s manufacturing industry suffered a contraction in July due to disruption in demand and production caused by the rollout of the good and services tax GST ), but the industry is confident about a quick rebound, shows a survey released on Tuesday.The Nikkei India Manufacturing Purchasing Manager’s Index (PMI) – an indicator of the economic health of the manufacturing sector derived from monthly survey of companies – stood at 47.9 in July, its lowest mark since February 2009. A reading below 50 indicates contraction and above 50 on the index indicates expansion. The index reading was 50.9 in June.Most of those surveyed, however, expect a quick rebound from GSTrelated disruptions, and the level of confidence was at an 11-month high.“Manufacturing growth in India came to a halt in July, with the PMI down to its lowest mark in almost eight-and-a-half years amid widespread reports that the sector has been adversely affected by the implementation of the GST,” said Pollyanna De Lima, economist at IHS Markit and author of the report.New orders and output decreased for the first time since the demonetisation-related downturn in December last year, and both fell the steepest in more than eight years.The rate of reduction was the most pronounced since the global financial crisis, the survey said.Citing anecdotal evidence, the survey showed that GST launch hampered demand, due to which companies adjusted production lower in July.“Those panelists that signalled reduction blamed lower inflows of new work and the introduction of the GST for the downturn,” it said.Despite the slump in manufacturing activity, Indian manufacturers foresee better times ahead, with almost 28% of companies anticipating higher output over next 12 months. GST is expected to support formal sector growth going ahead, and the industry is hopeful that the RBI will ease key lending rates this week.The weakness in PMI in the run-up to GST may have something to do with the pressure to clear stocks. But it also suggests continuing lacklustre output growth, and consequently, the need for proactive policy action. Lagging indicators, typically “output” oriented, are easy to measure but hard to improve or influence upon at least in the short-term. In contrast, leading indicators are input oriented, harder to measure and often easier to influence. We need a set of both leading and lagging indicators to keep better tab on economic activity.
NEW DELHI: The Goods and Services Tax Council will at its next meeting finalise a mechanism to operationalise the anti-profiteering clause which seeks to protect consumers interest, finance minister Arun Jaitley told the Lok Sabha on Tuesday. He said a proper decision would be taken on Air India's future and it would be in the government's interest to protect jobs at the airline.Replying to a discussion on supplementary demands for grants which was later passed by the LS he said demonetisation had squeezed terror funding.The GST Council comprising state finance minister will meet on August 5 to take stock of implementation of GST which was rolled from July 1. The anti-profiteering provision mandates businesses to pass on the benefits arising out of lower taxes to the consumer by way of commensurate reduction in prices.On concerns raised by members with regard to impact of GST on prices, Jaitley said it would be mandatory for manufacturers to pass on the benefits of reduction in taxes to consumers. He hoped that the decision of price cut by automobile sector on account of benefit of input tax credit would be followed by others manufacturers.“What if input tax benefit is not transfered to consumers?...we are meeting a few days from now... In a short while, we are going to finalise the entire mechanism as far as anti-profiteering is concerned.“All you need is to make a few examples and then everybody will fall in line. If there is benefit of the input credit then cost correspondingly must decline,” he said while replying to a discussion on supplementary demands for grants. The industry was resistant to this clause, he said, adding, it has been put in the GST law for initial few years to save the interest of consumers. The supplementary demands include a provision of Rs 2,000 crore for refund of Central GST to industries in hilly and special category states of North East, Uttrakhand and Himachal Pradesh.Jaitley said demonetisation squeezed terror funding with the number of stone pelters coming down in Jammu & Kashmir. He said the RBI is in the process of exercise of counting the notes as also identifying fake notes and will give the total number of returned notes after the completion of exercise. “In the last few months, security forces have had an upper hand...,” Jaitley said. He said in 2008 to 2010 there were thousands of stone pelters on streets.“In last few months, there have not been more than 25-50 or 100 stone pelters on the streets. There is one reason, terror funding has been squeezed,” he said responding to opposition charge that demonetisation had failed to curb terrorism and fake currency.
NEW DELHI: As many as 27 lakh businesses are yet to complete registration on the GSTN portal and the process has to be completed before they file their returns by August 20, the GST Network said today.Of the over 71 lakh excise, VAT, service taxpayers who have migrated to the GST portal , only 44 lakh have so far completed the enrolment process by filling up Part-B of the form. As many as 27 lakh taxpayers have incomplete enrolments.After activating the provisional ID, taxpayers have to fill up Part-B of the form giving details of businesses to complete the registration process.If a taxpayer does not submit entire details within three months of getting provisional ID, then the ID stands cancelled."Even though the law allows enrolled taxpayers time of 3 months to submit Part-B, they should not wait until the last moment to complete this formality. In fact they need to hurry, because they will be able to file their returns only after they have submitted the completed form," GSTN said.The deadline for filing the first return GSTR-3B is August 20."Those who fail to submit enrolment form with completed Part-B before this date will not be allowed by the GST IT system to file this return," GSTN Chairman Navin Kumar said.
