In an interview with ET Now,, gives his take on SEBI 's latest move, shares his views on GST and speaks on the recent 25 bps rate cut and its impact on the economy . Edited excerpts:I am delighted to see that SEBI has at last come out with this notification because everyone should know, the information must be across, if a borrower defaults to one lender and it never gets public and the company is listed. If the company is listed there has to be some regulation that they have to inform the market, the players, the bankers, the shareholders and so this is an overdue, this is a request which was overdue and I am delighted Mr Tyagi has taken the bold move. It will put companies into greater difficulty but it brings more transparency, it brings more openness, it brings credibility to the system to the financial system. So it is a move absolutely in the right direction.So it is a temporary setback, everyone had a temporary setback because of GST. Pharmaceutical companies also across the board for the inventory related the last 15-20 days the sales had come to a standstill in the end of middle of June to end of June. So it was impacted, the bottom line was impacted, the revenues were impacted, every industry has been impacted but it is an excellent move, it is a right move for the long run. There may be some pain for a quarter or so but I think we are getting there and the pain is much less than was anticipated. The adjustment is much easier, I expected there would be more disruption but there is a little lesser disruption and I am delighted to see that things are getting into order.Fixing the rate of interest is RBI prerogative, it is the MPC prerogative and we have to go by their wisdom and their knowledge and the majority of them felt the reduction was 25 bps which is okay at this time. I am quite happy with that.
Engineering exporters ' body EEPC India today said that shipping companies are facing difficulties post GST as their drawback refunds will not be released till September-end or October.Moreover, the supplies of goods to the export-oriented units from the domestic tariff area are not considered as "deemed exports" under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime, resulting in denial of duty free imports of inputs under the 'Advance Authorisation' scheme of the government, the exporters' body said in a statement."In fact, several schemes for giving a boost to exporters by the commerce ministry have been turned upside down and their functioning has become extremely difficult or not viable," EEPC India Chairman T S Bhasin said in a statement.Exports of engineering goods constitute the biggest share in India's overall export basket and are therefore, vital for job creation, particularly in the small and medium enterprises segment."Our members have informed us that it would be impossible for them to export in August and September as per this refund time schedule. We request and kindly urge the finance ministry to make the GSTN operative for processing returns and refunds by the beginning of August," EEPC India said in its communication to the finance and commerce ministries.According to the exporters' body, as supply of goods to the export oriented units (EoU) from domestic tariff area are not considered as "deemed exports" in the GST regime, shippers are not allowed to import the inputs without payment of duty under Advance Authorisation.Moreover, exporters will have to pay the basic customs duty, cesses and IGST for imported inputs to be used for supplies to EoU. They are entitled to input tax credit of only IGST. Basic customs duty and cesses are thereon a cost to them.
Even as completed properties for which an occupancy certificate has been secured from a municipal body are exempted from GST , a section of builders continue to levy tax on it. Builders say there is a general confusion over applicability of the tax, especially on projects where the occupancy certificate has been secured for part of the scheme.A large section of builders continue to levy GST even on completed flats in case the occupancy certificate is issued for part of the project. However, officials in erstwhile service tax department now in-charge of GST told TOI, the tax will only apply to amount paid for flats under construction. "If a person buys a ready to move in flat, GST is not applicable. So, even if the occupancy certificate has been issued only for part of the building scheme, the ready units, for the document has been secured, will not be taxed," officials said.TOI came across builders, including those associated to Confederation of Real Estate Developers of India ( CREDAI ), who said they charged the tax in case the occupancy certificate was issued for part of the project. They admitted that there was confusion in this regard.Malvika Saraf, a college teacher, was asked to shell out 12% extra as GST, though her building was ready to move in. The builder had constructed the flat at the site in New Narendra Nagar before GST had set in. "During the initial negotiations, the builder said 12% GST will have to be levied even though the flat was already built in pre-GST era. When countered, he changed the stance saying that even the 12% was part of the overall deal," said Saraf, who finally preferred not to buy the property.The president of CREDAI Anil Nair and secretary Gaurav Agarwala said there is a confusion in regards of payment of the tax.Agarwala said, at times only part of the scheme is completed, which can include only a few blocks or wings. In order to avoid confusion, he has been levying the tax on the customer. To ensure that the customers is not taxed, the amount taken as GST is also adjusted as discount from the final price of the deal.Nair said, "Confusion prevails for cases where in a single vertical block, the certificate is issued to part of the floors. It is not certain if such properties are spared of the tax also. In my opinion, GST is applicable on the entire building in such a case," he said.An officer handing GST in erstwhile service tax department, however, said it is clear that ready units with occupancy certificate cannot be taxed. "In the normal course, certificate are issued to entire block and not floor-wise," he said.