More than a month after the government set up a cell in the commerce ministry to make exporters familiar with the recently introduced Goods and Services Tax, it is still flooded with queries, mostly related to refunds and blocking of working capital.“We get more than 50 GST queries on Twitter every day, almost a hundred emails and phone calls at various centres,” said an official.The main concern of exporters is working capital getting locked up due to GST. According to industry estimates, over Rs 1.85 lakh crore belonging to exporters will get stuck with the government due to GST every year. Prior to the implementation of GST, exporters used to get exemption from duties. Now, they have to pay the duty first and then seek a refund, a process that ties up a portion of their working capital with the government and pushes up manufacturing costs.Exporters have to arrange money for inputs, manufacturing and payment of duties and taxes.“Our members have informed us that it would be impossible for them to export in August and September as per this refund time schedule. We request the finance ministry to make GSTN (Goods and Services Tax Network) operative for processing returns and refunds,” EEPC India, the apex body for engineering exports , said in a communication to the finance and commerce ministries.GSTN will operate a uniform interface for taxpayers and a common and shared IT infrastructure between the Centre and the states. The portal will provide an IT backbone for the smooth functioning of the GST regime so that the nation can be leveraged as one market with minimal indirect tax compliance costs.The liquidity problem will reduce the competitiveness of exporters by 2% due to the interest burden on them, according to Ajay Sahai, director general, Federation of Indian Export Organisations. Other issues flagged include paying IGST or taking exemption under Letter of Undertaking or bond, which increases compliance costs. Integrated GST (IGST) is collected by the Centre on the interstate supply of goods and services and is also applicable to imports.“We are in consultation with the finance ministry and have recommended some ways of resolving the issue,” the official said, adding that the government tries to resolve exporters’ queries in a day or two.The way forward is to smartly leverage information technology to digitise transactions and speed up trade facilitation. Besides, it cannot be gainsaid that GST would put paid to cascading effects of multiple taxes, reduce costs and make our exports more competitive going forward. The two main export promotion schemes, Merchandise Exports from India Scheme (MEIS) and Services Exports from India Scheme (SEIS), do need to be better aligned with the GST regime.
It has been more than 40 days since GST has been implemented in India. While the industry was very apprehensive, the GST transition has been smooth. The big question is how GST will impact a common man’s budget.GST is stated to be one of the biggest tax reforms in India, which would not only impact the businesses but also the common man.The primary impact to be felt by the consumers would change in prices of goods and services on account of GST rates.In terms of impact in prices, while services would mostly be more expensive in the initial phases, impact on prices of goods could be a mixed bag. In the long run, once the benefits of GST are expected to kick in in terms of higher input credits and reduction in cascading effect, it is anticipated that the inflationary effect will come down and prices, in general, would come down and stabilize.In services, the tax rate has increased from 15% to 18%. The 3% increase could potentially mean an increase in the price of services by 3% for the common man, in the short run.Within the household budget, there are likely to be some obvious gainers and some obvious losers but once the law and pricing of commodities reach steady state, all consumers should gain. We have provided a few examples to explain the impact of GST on the common man, the impact on pricing on account of additional credits and hence reduced cost of supply is separate.GST is expected to bring greater transparency, improve compliance levels and create a common playing field for businesses by amalgamating a host of central and local taxes. It would change the current tax regime of production-based taxation to a consumption-based system. There is no doubt that the corporates would benefit once they settle in under GST and assess the impact on their respective businesses; however, the advantages to the common man may take longer to be apparent.It is expected that the consumer would also reap the benefits of the new tax regime, once the corporates have transitioned completely to the new tax structure and start to pass on the benefits to the end user.The author is a tax partner at EY India. Views expressed are personal.
In an interview with ET Now,, gives his take on the company's numbers. Edited excerpts:In this quarter, ie the summer season, procurement prices of milk go up and this has impacted our margins. As season changes and the milk production improves, milk prices will come down and an improvement will be seen in in the quarters ahead. As far as top line is concerned, we have been able to achieve one of the best quarters with a 32% increase in revenue.GST did not have a very serious impact on us because close to 75% of our revenue is exempt from GST. Small quantities of value added products attract GST. Most of the milk, butter milk, lassi, curd are all exempt from GST so we do not see much impact of GST on any products. Incidentally, we have reduced the prices of sweets because tax has gone down under GST and the prices have come down in the sweet segment. However, sweets do not contribute much revenue to our business.This season the contribution of branded value added products was close to 26% and a growth of 22% over the previous quarter. The trend continues to be good in terms of sales of value added products.We are looking at high value added premium products category that is flavoured and fruit yoghurts and western style deserts from this French company partnership. It has just been concluded a few days ago. We will be setting up a greenfield plant soon in the western part of the country to produce value added yoghurts and deserts. This will be a 20 tonne per day capacity plant. Next financial year we will expect the production to come in and sales to commence.Yes, it is good and we are able to stabilise the operations integration. All the team integration and logistics integration, plants integration now efficiencies is our focus in the coming months. Customers have accepted our brand and volumes are also growing. We just started marketing efforts because our logo has changed recently and packing materials have changed. There is a transition from the earlier logo of Reliance brand and so the channel is happy, the customers are happy.
