NEW DELHI: The mid-year Economic Survey has called for including electricity, alcohol, real estate , health and education, in the framework of goods and services tax to expand the base of the newly implemented indirect tax "Bringing electricity into GST framework would improve competitiveness of Indian industry because taxes on power get embedded in manufacturers' costs, and can be claimed back as input tax credit," said the Economic Survey Volume-2, authored by chief economic adviser Arvind Subramanian. Inclusion of land and real estate, and alcohol in GST will improve transparency and reduce corruption.Criticising the decision to keep health and education completely out of GST, the survey said the move is "inconsistent with equity" as these services are consumed disproportionately by the rich.It also called for increasing tax on gold and jewellery from the current 3 per cent, saying it is another segment "disproportionately consumed by the very rich".The survey said there are "early signs of tax base expansion". In June and July, 6.6 lakh new agents previously outside the tax net have sought GST registration, it said. This is expected to rise consistently as the incentives for formalisation increase. "Preliminary estimates point to potentially large increases in the tax base as a consequence," the survey said.Rolled out on July 1, GST has brought in uniformity or the principle of ‘one good, one tax’ all over the country. "So relative to the past, there is now uniformity rather than multiplicity as well as considerably less complexity," the survey said.The survey also made a case for reducing GST compliance burden and asked the government for more centralised procedures. Increased compliance requirements, it said, will be faced only by a small number of agents with a pan-India presence whose ability to comply will be commensurately greater.Referring to discussions in the GST Council, the survey said that attempts were made to preserve the previous, simpler system. "Going forward, there is scope for more centralised procedures to minimise the compliance burden," it said, and asked the GST Council to take up these challenges in the months ahead to take India from a good GST to a better GST.
NEW DELHI: Telecom minister Manoj Sinha on Friday said the telecom operators should be able to absorb increase in GST rate on telecom.The industry has been demanding government intervention to lower the GST rates to 5 per cent citing telecom as essential services. Post GST, telecom falls in the 18 per cent category, up 3 per cent from 15 per cent in the pre-GST regime."The criterion was to keep the rate for any sector close to one of the four slabs. For e.g. a former rate of 17.5 per cent will fall in 18 per cent. Secondly, telecom operators will also get input credit of around 1.75 per cent as per the information from finance ministry officials, making the effective rate at 16.25 per cent. Virtual difference (after factoring in input credit) is little more than 1 per cent. Had they been kept in 12 per cent, the rate would have been around 10 per cent. Rates have risen marginally after GST– which the telecom service providers can easily absorb." He added that if needed, the GST council is reviewing the rates if there is a genuine demand. "But the impact of 1 per cent increase on 40 paisa will be minuscule."Calling Reliance Jio 's presence a healthy move for the market, the minister said data consumption has risen six times because of Reliance Jio. "The whole telecom market is shifting towards data; now it is not voice-centric but data-centric. Jio has made voice free. It is a marketing move."Allaying fears of other operators due to Jio that has been giving them a run for their money, Sinha said whenever a new operator enters the markets there are bound to be some ups and downs--- a similar situation was seen in 2002 (with the entry of Reliance Infocomm). "But the market stabilized in some time. India's is a huge market; entry of one operators can't destabilize the market in the long run."Sinha who also hold charge of railways as minister of state, said wider consultations are on for the new telecom policy. He said the focus in telecom sector has changed drastically since the time the last policy was made in 2002. "When the 2012 policy was made, connectivity was the main issue. Today's issues are IoT (Internet of Things), 5G, artificial intelligence, internet-for-all." Once the policy is made, it will put it on the website for public opinion. "We should have the new policy by Feb-March 2018. We aim at making such a comprehensive policy that a need should not arise to make amendments for the next 10 years."On improving health of state-owned BSNL, he said the telecom operator is moving in the right direction. he said that after having incurred huge losses in 2006-07, the PSU made (operating) profit of Rs 670 crore, and Rs 3,800 crore in FY15 and FY16, respectively.
