Another quarterly results season has ended with lacklustre numbers from India Inc. The aggregate net profit of 2,418 companies fell 8.63% in the first quarter of 2017-18, compared to the same period last year. Destocking prior to the implementation of the goods and services tax ( GST ) is the main reason behind the poor numbers. This was also reflected in the Index of Industrial Production (IIP) which fell 0.1% compared to June 2016—contracting for the first time in 48 months. Compared to May, IIP fell 1%.However, since the market was expecting a poor set of numbers for this quarter, it did not react negatively. Some sectors, though, belied Street expectations. “Broadly, first quarter results have been in line with the overall estimates. While retail-focused private sector financial companies and cement firms delivered a positive surprise, pharmaceuticals fared weaker than was expected,” says Gopal Agrawal, CIO, Equity, Tata Mutual Fund.So, when will things improve? Market participants have begun asking this question more frequently because the market has already rallied expecting an early rebound in growth. GST implementation-related issues have spread to the second quarter as well. However, experts say that it is transitory in nature and investors don’t need to get worried. “Though data like Purchase Managers Index (PMI) has weakened significantly in July due to GST implementation-related issues, the impact should be transitory,” says Aayushi Kukreja, Economist, Morgan Stanley Research. Agrawal of Tata Mutual Fund concurs: “GST-related issues started getting sorted from around mid-July, so the negative impact will last only up to the first few weeks of the current quarter.”Though the immediate issues will be solved soon, the lingering impact of the GST disruption will continue for some more time. This is why now the government is no longer confident of achieving the higher end of its GDP growth estimate—6.75-7.5%— for 2017-18, stated in the economic survey. “Some disruption in economic activity was expected on account of the new taxation regime and the economy would take some time to return back to full steam,” says Anis Chakravarty, Lead Economist, Deloitte. Phani Shekhar, Fund Manager, PMS, Karvy Capital agrees: “Don’t expect any significant improvement in corporate numbers in this financial year.”Though the overall numbers are expected to remain weak, sectoral performance, just like the first quarter, will vary in the coming quarters as well. “Sectors such as telecom and banks will continue to struggle in the coming quarters too,” says Shekhar. The aggregate net profit of telecom services sector fell 395% due to the onslaught by Reliance Jio. The cut-throat competition in telecom is still continuing and it may take few more quarters before things settle down. Corporate-focused public sector financial firms such as SBI are still under pressure due to their ballooning non-performing assets (NPA). Since contribution from the financial segment to the market is big, overall earnings revival is not possible unless this sector gets out of the wood. “Two big exporting sectors, IT and pharma, are also not doing well now,” points out Shekhar. In addition to the growth worries in facing IT and pharma, the appreciating rupee is another factor that is hurting them.Growth is likely to stay muted in the second quarter as well.Based on 2,418 companies. Compiled by ETIG Database.*Net profit fall is more than 100% because the industry reported losses this quarter compared to profit for the same period last year.Base metal is one segment that is expected to improve its performance in the coming quarters. “Base metals prices have started rising, so companies from these sectors may report good numbers in the second quarter,” says Agrawal. Base metals, especially the nonferrous metals like aluminium, nickel, copper, zinc, etc., have rallied in the recent past because of the production restriction imposed by China. A result of the crackdown for environmental violations, these restrictions have eliminated the surplus production from the market.Sustained economic growth is possible only when the investment demand picks up and, for that, companies need to start investing in new plants. Experts believe that the pick-up in investment demand won’t happen anytime soon. “It will take at least one more year for the investment demand to pick up,” says Agrawal. Low capacity utilisation is the main reason why companies have been holding capital expenditure. They won’t set up new capacities till utilisation levels improve. “In addition to low capacity utilisation, nonavailability of credit is another issue,” says Shekhar. Though the banking system is flush with cash on account of the deposits in the wake of demonetisation, banks are not in a good shape to lend to large projects due to their NPA issues.Investors need to be careful because the market is holding out at higher levels, despite the weak corporate numbers. And valuation continues to be at elevated levels, despite the recent correction. While the Sensex PE (price-equity ratio) is placed at 23.48, Nifty is trading at a PE of 25.28. “Investors should stick to market leaders and not attempt bottom fishing,” says Shekhar.
Banks importing gold and precious metals will have to pay 3 per cent tax under the GST which can be claimed as input tax credit, the government has said.Clarifying issues on GST on gems and jewellery through Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs), the Central Board of Excise and Customs said banks did not pay any VAT on import of precious metals previously. They only paid customs duty.However, under GST, "3 per cent Integrated-GST is payable on all imports of precious metals in addition to the basic customs duty. IGST paid can be taken as input tax credit by the banks."It also said banks would be liable to pay IGST on such imports and not any overseas supplier in which ownership is vested during movement of gold or silver."Ownership is not material for determining whether an import has taken place. Banks, being registered entities, would be liable to pay IGST on such imports but not the overseas entities since they are not effecting the import," the FAQ said.Import of gold attracts a 10 per cent basic customs duty. On top of that a 12.5 per cent countervailing duty (CVD) was levied prior to GST.Since GST subsumed CVD, hence the GST rate on gold at 3 per cent has to be paid at the time of imports in the form of IGST with effect from July 1.The CBEC also clarified on levy of GST where the total value of a gold ornament is Rs 30,000, including Rs 2,000 as making charge saying, "GST is payable at the rate of 3 per cent of the total transaction value of jewellery, whether the making charge is shown separately or not".
As much as Rs 42,000 crore has already come in as taxes so far in the first monthly filing under the new Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime and the revenues are expected to swell further as the filing cycle closes this later this week.A senior official said that about Rs 15,000 crore has come in as Integrated-GST, which is levied on inter-state movement of goods, and another Rs 5,000 crore by way of cess on demerit goods like cars and tobacco.The remaining Rs 22,000 crore has come in as Central-GST and State-GST, which would be split equally between the Union and state government."Tax deposited till this morning was Rs 42,000 crore," the official said.So far, 10 lakh tax payers have filed returns and another 20 lakh have logged in and saved return forms."We are seeing good compliance and our estimation is that 90-95 per cent of the assesses will file returns and pay taxes," he said.Under the GST regime, which was implemented from July 1, businesses are expected to file the monthly tax return.Tax for the first month is to be filed by an extended deadline of August 25. The deadline was extended as the tax return filing website snapped just a day before the due date ended on August 20.GST unifies more than a dozen central and state levies including excise duty service tax and VAT , and the revenue generated is to be split equally between the Centre and states.In July last year, Rs 31,782 crore of excise duty was collected and Rs 19,600 crore of service tax.Estimate for the combined sales tax or VAT collection by states was available.While 72 lakh assessees of the old indirect tax regime have migrated to the GST Network portal , nearly 50 lakh have completed the migration process.Besides, of the 15 lakh fresh registrations that have happened, as many as 10 lakh are expected to file returns for July.A total of 60 lakh businesses are expected to file returns and pay taxes for July, the official added.As per the GST law, any registered person who fails to furnish the details of outward or inward supplies or returns required by the due date will have to pay a late fee of Rs 100 for every day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum amount of Rs 5,000.Besides, every person who fails to pay the tax within the period prescribed, shall for the period for which the tax or any part thereof remains unpaid, will be required to pay interest at 18 per cent from the day succeeding the day on which such tax was due to be paid.The collections from customs duty and IGST from imports post-implementation of GST have almost doubled to Rs 30,000 crore in July.This compares to indirect tax collection of over Rs 16,000 crore of the same month of 2016.