Just over two months since the nationwide rollout of the Goods and Services Tax (GST), tax rates on almost a 100 items have undergone changes. Besides, a raft of clarifications and notifications have been issued. All this has prompted companies and tax consultants to complain about the dampening impact the new indirect tax regime is having on business sentiment. “Implementation of GST was to create a single unified large market with simplified tax structure for the auto industry,” Hyundai Motor India said in a statement. “However, the recent rolling back to multiple rates with pre-GST classification has come as a setback to industry, shaking the confidence of auto manufacturers,” the Indian subsidiary of the South Korean auto major said. Since July 1, the GST Council has changed the tax and cess rates on at least 98 goods and services, and issued 32 notifications, clarifications and corrigenda. The resultant uncertainty over the tax rates and procedures could adversely impact investments and prices, say tax experts and corporations. “The multiple changes in the rates and processes made after the introduction of GST have led to some degree of uncertainty, which industry has had to grapple with and it is hoped that incremental changes are not made on an ongoing basis,” said M.S. Mani, senior director - Indirect Tax, Deloitte India. Auto makers are upset with the rule changes, since the cess applicable on motor vehicles was increased as recently as September 11, leading to further uncertainty in the sector and an increase in prices across almost all segments. “Following the ordinance on GST amendment, we have to revise the price of our products in line with the cess hike which may nearly reflect the prices in the pre-GST scenario,” N. Raja, director & senior vice-president, Marketing and Sales at Toyota Kirloskar Motor, said. “We expect the coming festive season to witness low customer sentiment on new purchase decisions,” Hyundai said in its statement.
Vegetable prices shot up by 44.91 % in August, as against 21.95 % in July.Wholesale inflation rose to a four-month high of 3.24 % in August as prices of food articles, led by onions and vegetables, soared. Inflation based on the wholesale price index (WPI) was 1.88 % in July 2017 and 1.09 % in August 2016. The last such high level of inflation was witnessed in April when the rate of price rise was 3.85 %. The government data released on Thursday showed that the prices of food articles went up by 5.75 % in August on a yearly basis, as against 2.15 % in July. Vegetable prices shot up by 44.91 % in August, as against 21.95 % in July. Onion prices witnessed a sharp surge at 88.46 % in August, as against a contraction of 9.50 % in the previous month. Inflation in manufactured products witnessed a slight increase at 2.45 % in August, against 2.18 % in July. In fuel and power segment, inflation saw a sharp surge to a near double digit at 9.99 %, against 4.37 % in July. Fuel inflation shot up as petrol and diesel prices continued to remain high relentlessly on global crude oil rates, while power tariffs shot through the roof on lower domestic production. Apart from vegetables, s prices of pulses, fruits (7.35 %), egg, meat and fish (3.93 %), cereals (0.21 %) and paddy (2.70 %) also was on the increase. However, potato continued to see deflation at 43.82 % and pulses (-)30.16 %. The final print of June WPI inflation remained unchanged from provisional estimate of 0.90 %. Data released earlier this week showed retail inflation rose to a five-month high of 3.36 % in August due to costlier vegetables and fruits. Also industrial production grew by just 1.2 % in July from 4.5 % a year ago, bearing the brunt of a dismal show of the manufacturing sector. Last month, the Reserve Bank cut policy repo rate by 0.25 % to 6 % citing reduction in inflation risk. The rate cut was the first in 10 months and brought policy rates to near 7-year low. The RBI has said that it will endeavour to keep retail inflation close to 4 % but in the near term, there might be some uptick on account of pay commission payouts and price adjustments post GST rollout from July 1.
Changes in the tax structure on coal following the introduction of GST would translate to a ₹6,000 crore relief to the power sector, a senior Coal India Ltd. (CIL) official told shareholders on Thursday. Asked about the impact of demonetisation and GST at the company’s annual general meeting, CIL’s Director Finance C.K. Dey said there had not been much of an impact due to demonetisation as payments were online. GST, however, had brought some changes in the way coal was taxed, he said. Coal, which had earlier attracted 6% excise and 11% VAT, was now taxed 5% GST. However, the inputs that it provided had a tax rate varying between 18% to 28% which would be refunded to CIL. “It is an inverted tax” which works out to a ₹6,000 crore annualised relief for power sector, Mr. Dey said. “While CIL’s gross turnover will be impacted due to this, its net turnover will remain the same,” he added. Earlier, CIL Chairman Gopal Singh said increased output over the last three years, had led to foreign exchange savings of ₹25,900 crore. Despatch to power utilities grew by 3% in 2016-17 and would have been higher but for regulated intake by generating firms, he added. On CIL’s prospects, Mr. Singh told reporters that generation at coal-based thermal power plants had increased by 17% in August against a dip in hydel and nuclear generation. On the proposed diversification, he said that many new initiatives were being explored , but CIL would concentrate on coal and would need to step up to a double digit growth rate to meet its production targets (of one billion million tonnes by 2020). On shareholders’ concerns about CIL’s dipping profits, company officials explained that provisions for future wage increases (now under negotiation), decrease in treasury income and increase in contractual expenses were some of the reasons which had led to this. It may be mentioned here that CIL’s net profit dipped from ₹14,267 crores in 2015-16 to ₹9,266 crores in 2016-17.
