The sharp reduction drawback rates announced by the government for textile and clothing products may slow down exports of these goods, according to the industry. The drawback rate announced for garments is 2% as against 7.7% earlier. In the case of made-ups, it was 7.3% and has been reduced to 2% now. The Excise and Service Tax components have been subsumed under the Goods and Services Tax and only the basic Customs Duty is refunded under the drawback scheme. This was on expected lines. But, the reduction in drawback rates is steep and the GST system is not working as expected, said industry sources. There is a delay in refund of the input tax under GST. Annual textile exports have been stagnant for the last three years at about $37 billion. The reduction in drawback rates will become another contributing factor to slow down exports, said sources. The government should extend the transitional provision for duty drawback and Rebate of State Levies (ROSL) till the end of March next year, said industry representatives. “A major area of concern for exporters is the inordinate delay in refund of GST,” said Ujwal Lahoti, chairman of the Cotton Textiles Export Promotion Council. “Exporters who shipped their goods in July are yet to receive refund of input tax credits or IGST paid. This has caused serious working capital problems for a large number of exporters,” he added. Currently, the ROSL scheme provides for refund of State levies on export goods for garments and made-ups. However, the scheme does not cover the embedded State levies, such as electricity tax and market cess, from fibre to made-ups, he said. The Apparel Export Promotion Council said it was in consultation with the drawback committee and the ministries concerned for consideration of several embedded and blocked taxes that are not covered in GST or drawback. The industry was expecting continuation of the present drawback rates till the consultations were completed. The low drawback rate announced for apparels is a blow when the industry is facing continuous decline in exports, said the council in a press release.
