India is expected to be a USD 6 trillion economy — the third largest in the world — in the next 10 years, majorly helped by digitisation, says a report. According to global brokerage Morgan Stanley, India’s digitisation drive would provide a boost of 50-75 basis points to GDP growth in the coming decade. “We estimate that digitisation will provide a boost of 50-75 basis points to GDP growth and forecast that India will grow to USD 6 trillion economy and achieve upper-middle income status by by 2026-27,” Morgan Stanley head India research and India equity strategist Ridham Desai told reporters here. “We expect India’s real and nominal GDP growth to compound annually by 7.1 per cent and 11.2 per cent respectively over the coming decade,” he added. Citing the report ‘India’s digital leap — The multi-trillion dollar opportunity’ released today, Desai said apart from some short term teething problems including implementation of GST, there is scope for visible shifts in economic activity starting in 2018 which would eventually lead India to be the top five equity markets in the world with a market capitalisation of USD 6.1 trillion and the third—largest listed financial services sector around the globe with a market cap of USD 1.8 trillion by 2027. India’s consumer sectors is also likely to add about USD 1.5 trillion over the next ten years.  “We project gross FDI inflows amounting to USD 120 billion by FY’27, almost double the current 12-month trailing run rate of USD 64 billion,” Desai said. Accordingly, Mr. Desai also noted that stock markets are likely to remain robust as a stronger economic growth should drive stronger corporate earnings growth. Mr. Desai also said the country is also likely to witness strong domestic participation in equities. “We project equity saving of USD 420 billion-USD 525 billion over the next ten years, versus the respective USD 60 billion and USD 120 billion that households and foreign portfolios invested over the previous ten years,” he said. While the report exudes confidence that India’s growth story is to continue, it also identified certain risks. These are with respect to political stability, privacy debate over Aadhaar, and implementation of GST, among others. The report said that while the Supreme Court has made privacy a fundamental right in a recent judgement, private parties will likely continue to question whether Aadhaar violates privacy rights. “Any adverse judgement in the courts could derail one of the main anchors of our framework,” it said. Further, it noted that GST is expected to disrupt smaller businesses causing job losses and a general slowdown in economic growth, however, it is likely to lead to lower public debt to GDP subsequently.
The Centre is considering a proposal from the industry to allow small firms to file quarterly returns even as they pay taxes on a monthly basis under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime. This follows the troubles these small firms are having regarding complying with the GST norms due to their limitations in getting professional help, lack of connectivity and technological glitches. Sources said discussions were on regarding the threshold limit for small firms who could be granted such a relaxation. Chandrajit Banerjee, Director General, CII, said in a statement that, “filing of GST return may be made on a quarterly basis, as against the current monthly filing requirement as the MSME sector is still not well equipped with the IT infrastructure and a qualified manpower; this small measure will help bring them into the GST mainstream.” The suggestion was made at finance minister Arun Jaitley’s meeting on Thursday with industry bodies and exporters to address their GST-related problems. The Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO) raised demands including seeking exemption for merchant exporters from GST. “Merchant exporters account for over 30% of country’s exports who usually work on razor thin margins of 2-4%,” FIEO said in a statement. “The imposition of GST has made their costing go haywire, particularly for products having higher GST rate, as they have to pay GST and seek refund after some time lag.” They also wanted the Centre to expedite GST refunds to help them tide over the liquidity crunch. “... even in the best of situation, input tax credit refund would not be available before the first week of November,” FIEO said. “Most of the exporters, particularly from MSME category, hardly have financial wherewithal to pay GST liabilities for three months without having refund in the meantime.” “For ease of doing business especially for the MSME, provisional input tax credit period may be extended to 6 months from the current 2 months’ period; this will help cross matching of invoices through the GSTN portal and also save the blockage of the working capital for the small players,” said the CII’s Mr. Banerjee. Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) Council Member Satwinder Singh said concerns regarding reverse charge mechanism (RCM) and refund were raised in the meeting. “Under RCM, threshold exemption for payment of tax may be increased from the present ₹5,000 to ₹50,000 which shall help ease burden of excessive compliances especially for the MSME players,” the CII suggested. “Format of returns may also be simplified and only basic core details may be required to be furnished,” the CII added. Representatives from KPMG, Amazon, Gems and Jewellery Export Promotion Council, Laghu Udyog Bharati, GST service providers, ICSI and Institute of Chartered Accountants of India were also present. FICCI, in a statement, said it wants the GST Council members to quickly address the issues that have been thrown up in the implementation process.
