At 10.02am, Tata Steel shares traded 0.27% lower to Rs730.45 on BSE. Photo: MintJamshedpur: Tata Steel Ltd is committed to further growing its business in India and is hoping to work more closely with the government, a top official said on Friday.The successful roll out of the goods and services tax (GST) also had positive implications across the company’s value chain in India, T.V. Narendran, CEO and managing director of Tata Steel, said in a message to employees on the last day of the year.“2017 saw a recovery in global steel demand, prices and trade leading to better-than-expected performance by India’s steel sector. The year not only saw India becoming the third largest steel producer in the world, it managed to successfully reverse the trend of increasing imports as it became a net exporter,” he said.He added that the Centre’s national steel policy 2017 has drawn the long-term road map for steel vision in India. “In Tata Steel, we are committed to further growing our business in India and we look forward to working closely with the government contributing positively to India’s economic growth,” Narendran said.Following the successful ramp up of the 3 million tonne installed capacity at Kalinganagar, the board has approved a further expansion to 8 million tonnes at an additional capital outlay of Rs23,500 crore to be raised in a combination of equity and debt, he said.This will help the company in meeting India’s rising demand in automotive, general engineering and other valued-added segments, he said. Tata Steel is also hopeful that its plan for an equal joint venture with Thyssenkrupp AG will create Europe’s second largest steel maker, Narendran added.At 10.02am, Tata Steel shares traded 0.27% lower to Rs730.45 on BSE, while the Sensex was up 0.06% at 34,076.87 points.
Sales in maruti’s compact segment increased by 23.2%, while the same in the utility vehicle segment increased by 19.9% over the year-ago period. Photo: Pradeep Gaur/MintNew Delhi: India’s largest car maker Maruti Suzuki India Ltd continued to witness strong sales growth in December even as its nearest rival Hyundai Motor India Ltd posted flat sales numbers for the month.Sales at Maruti grew 12.1% in December to 1,19,286 units, driven by models such as the Dzire sedan, the Baleno hatchback and the Vitara Brezza sport utility vehicle (SUV), according to the monthly sales figures disclosed by the firm.Hyundai, according to a company statement, sold 40,158 units, up 0.03% over the year-ago period. In 2017, Hyundai sold 527,000 units in India, its highest ever.“Hyundai is facing acute production constraints and the company does not have the room to manufacture more vehicles like Creta, which actually has high demand,” said Anil Sharma, principal analyst, automotive forecasting, IHS Markit.Mumbai-based Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd (M&M) said sales of its passenger vehicles, such as Scorpio and Bolero models, declined 7% to 15,543 units during the month.“Mahindra on the other hand has not been able to make a mark in the compact UV (utility vehicle) segment and unless the company introduces a new offering, volumes will be difficult to come by. Rural demand has also been flat which has impacted the sales of M&M,” Sharma added.Rajan Wadhera, president (automotive sector), M&M, said his company is happy with its performance in 2017.“We are happy to have ended December 2017 with a growth of 8%. Our commercial vehicles growth for December has been encouraging at 24%, and we are particularly buoyed by our ongoing strong performance in the medium and heavy commercial vehicles (MHCV) segment, which indicates a vibrancy in the economy. Global automotive trends such as electric vehicles and shared mobility will be key indicators for 2018,” Wadhera added.In FY18, between April-December, passenger vehicle sales have grown 8.4% to 2.18 million units.To be sure, December typically is not a healthy month for auto sales as customers postpone purchase decisions to avoid depreciation in value of vehicles in the new year.On the other hand, auto makers resort to several marketing gimmicks to push sales, including discounts and announcements related to price increase, which may or may not happen.Maruti, however, has been an outlier. Sales in its compact segment increased by 23.2%, while the same in the utility vehicle segment increased by 19.9% over the year-ago period.But, what could be a matter of worry for Maruti is the decline in sales of its flagship sedan, Ciaz, whose sales plunged 35.8% to 2,382 units as the new Hyundai Verna launched in August gained traction with buyers.A decline in demand for Ciaz could also be attributed to an increase in taxes on hybrids under the goods and services tax (GST) regime.Ciaz’s hybrid version was a major driver for the model’s sales.Breaking the trend, Japanese carmaker Honda Cars India Ltd (HCIL) reported a 26% increase in sales—though on a very low base—to 12,642 units during the month.Offerings such as the Honda City and WR-V (a compact SUV) have managed to help the carmaker return to double-digit volume growth after a period to continuous decline in sales.“HCIL experienced robust growth during 2017, backed by good demand for all our products across segments, especially the Honda City and WR-V. Honda City has emerged as the highest selling mid-size sedan during 2017,” said Yoichiro Ueno, president and CEO, Honda Cars India.On the two-wheeler front, sales of TVS Motor Co. increased by 35.4% to 207,778 units.Scooter sales of the company grew by 50.5% to 83,640 units, while motorcycle sales grew by 63.7% to 95,281 units in December.Other manufacturers such as Hero MotoCorp Ltd, Honda Motorcycles and Scooters India, Tata Motors Ltd and Ashok Leyland Ltd did not report their sales numbers on Monday.
The decline in GST collection for December indicates that the system is likely to take more time to stabilize. Illustration: Jayachandran/MintThe last leg of 2017 did not pan out exactly the way the Narendra Modi government would have wanted it to. It also showed the kind of policy challenges that the government will have to deal with in 2018. The goods and services tax (GST) continues to face implementation issues and distress in the agriculture sector started to reflect in electoral outcomes. Even though the latest gross domestic product (GDP) data showed that the Indian economy is recovering from the twin policy shocks of demonetization and GST, and the pace of growth is likely to be higher in 2018 than 2017, broader economic management will not be easy. This is despite the ongoing synchronized global recovery, which will help the Indian economy during the year.The biggest challenge will be the management of government finances. Last week, the government announced that it would go in for additional market borrowings of Rs50,000 crore. The latest data showed that the government’s fiscal deficit reached 112% of the full-year target during April-November 2017. Most analysts now expect the government to breach the fiscal deficit target of 3.2% of GDP in the current year. Since there is still a fair bit of uncertainty in terms of revenue shortfall on account of GST, the extent to which it will miss the target will only become clear in coming weeks. This also makes the outlook for next fiscal uncertain. The decline in GST collection for December indicates that the system is likely to take more time to stabilize.Further, the problem may not remain limited to revenue. The government has indicated that the next budget will focus on rural India. Voting patterns in the recently concluded Gujarat election and the ensuing commentary suggest that the government will have to do something for the agriculture sector. Politically, this will also be important for the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party because of crucial assembly elections during the year. Preparations will also start for the general election. Increase in expenditure will add to the pressure on government finances in the next fiscal.Therefore, the challenge for the government will be to find a balance where it is able to address problems in the agriculture sector, which are genuine and need attention, with the minimum possible fiscal slippage. It will need to work on multiple fronts to keep finances in control. First, it will immediately need to work to stabilize the GST system. Better visibility on the revenue side will also help in managing expenditure. Second, the government has done reasonably well so far this year on the disinvestment front. It should aggressively use this option to overcome temporary glitches on the revenue side and maintain the momentum on capital expenditure. Third, the government will need to continue to move forward with reforms in order to improve the ease of doing business. India managed to move up 30 notches in the World Bank’s doing business rankings in 2017. Continued progress will increase economic activity, which will also help in generating revenue.The economy is unlikely to get support from monetary policy. Government intervention in the farm sector in terms of higher support prices, or higher import tariffs, will push up food prices. Crude prices have firmed up in recent months, rising significantly from the lows seen in 2015. Higher food and fuel prices and the possibility of fiscal slippage are unlikely to encourage the monetary policy committee of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to lower rates in the foreseeable future. However, the RBI can support economic activity through currency management. Even though the central bank intervened in the market in 2017, the real effective exchange rate is still showing significant overvaluation. As monetary policy is likely to move towards normalization in advanced economies and could affect capital flows, the RBI would do well to allow the rupee to depreciate.Overall, even though the headline growth numbers are likely to improve, economic management will be comparatively difficult in 2018. Fiscal management will be a real challenge and a big downside surprise could affect market sentiment. Further, the government would be well advised to move forward on the reforms path. Both foreign and domestic investors, for instance, will closely watch how well the bank recapitalization plan is executed. It is possible to use this opportunity to transform the sector forever. In the process, the government can also prepare the ground for privatization of some public sector banks. A lot is riding on how well the system adjusts to GST. Improvement in collection, among other things, would help in further rationalization of rates.As the government completes four years in office this year, it will be satisfied with its reforms scorecard. Since economic reform is a continuous process, the government should carry this process forward even in the last part of its tenure. The way it handles its finances and manages the economy in 2018 will have a bearing on growth and macroeconomic stability over the medium term.What can the government do to keep its finances under control? Tell us at views@livemint.com