As many as 170 complaints have been filed before the standing committee and screening committee by consumers against businesses for not passing on benefits of tax rate reduction since the roll out of GST from 1 July.New Delhi: Faced with increasing number of complaints under the anti-profiteering rules, the finance ministry will soon come out with a standard operating procedure (SoP) for handling grievances relating to over- charging after GST roll out.As many as 170 complaints have been filed before the standing committee and screening committee by consumers against businesses for not passing on benefits of tax rate reduction since the roll out of goods and services tax (GST) from 1 July.Of this, 50 have been referred to the directorate general of safeguards (DGS) for further investigation on profiteering complaint. The probe in five cases has already begun.According to officials, it may not be feasible for DGS to scrutinise such large number of complaints and give its report to the National Anti-Profiteering Authority within the stipulated three months. It can also seek an extension of another three months for finalising the report.The standard operating procedure (SoP) being worked out by the ministry will lay down guidelines for the standing committee and the screening committee for handling of consumer complaints.As per the structure of the anti-profiteering mechanism in the GST regime, complaints of local nature will be first sent to the state-level ‘screening committee’ while those of national level will be marked for the ‘standing committee’. If the complaints have merit, the respective committees would refer the cases for further investigation to the DGS.“An SoP is being worked out to enable expeditious resolution of consumer complaints. The effort would be to ensure that only complaints which have merit are passed on to the DGS,” the official told PTI.Once the complaints are referred to the DGS, the directorate is required to study balance sheet, profit and loss account, GST returns and details of invoice wise outward taxable supplies made by the company. It also has to scrutinise the price list prior to and post GST roll out before giving its report to the Anti- Profiteering Authority for further action.“Scrutinising large number of complaints in a short period of three months is not feasible. Hence the finance ministry is contemplating to come out with an SoP so that majority of the complaints are taken care of at the standing or screening committee level,” the official added.The SoP would also lay down the procedure for disposing of the complaints and issuing of warning to businesses or dealers in case it is warranted. Once DGS submits report, it would be scrutinised by the Anti-Profiteering Authority for further action, which may include fine and extreme penalty like cancellation of registration.
Analysts are concerned about the impact of rising oil and commodity prices that could hurt the Q3 earnings of consumer companies. Graphic: MintMumbai: The first signs of a rebound in corporate earnings growth will likely be visible in the December quarter due to the favourable effect of a low base a year ago and higher consumer spending in the festive season, analysts say. The earnings will also indicate whether the disruption caused by the implementation of the goods and services tax (GST) on 1 July has receded.The 8 November 2016 invalidation of high-value bank notes squeezed consumption in the third quarter of 2016-17, hitting sales and profits of companies.In the three months ended December 2016, aggregate sales of Sensex companies grew by 3.8%, Ebitda by 7.7% and net profit by 1%. For Nifty companies, sales, Ebitda and net profit grew 4.9%, 9.6% and 10.3%, respectively. Ebitda—or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization—is a measure of operating profitability.A boost to consumer demand from festivals, including Dussehra in September and Diwali in October, should also help companies post higher sales and profit growth, analysts said. The rupee’s appreciation may, however, hurt the earnings of exporters, and higher commodity prices may take their toll on the margins of packaged consumer goods makers.According to Edelweiss Securities Ltd, a recovery in company earnings will gain momentum on the back of the low base effect and the fading impact of GST-related disruptions. Edelweiss estimates Nifty companies to report revenue, Ebitda and net profit growth of 20%, 12% and 12% year-on-year (YoY), respectively, in the quarter from a year ago, implying 4% earnings per share (EPS) growth in the first nine months of FY18.“While earnings growth is improving, Q4FY18 asking rate (to meet full-year forecasts) is still high, implying potential downgrade risk. For FY19, Nifty growth is forecast to be 22-25%,” the research firm wrote in a note on 5 January.Kotak Institutional Equities Research sees net income of BSE Sensex companies growing 15.2% year-on-year (YoY) and 9.2% quarter-on-quarter (QoQ). It estimates EPS of Sensex companies at Rs1,480 for fiscal 2018 and Rs1,825 for fiscal 2019.
“Metals, non-banking financial companies (NBFC), oil and gas, autos, cement and consumer companies are likely to lead earnings growth in Q3 while telecom, IT (information technology) and pharma sectors may drag in the quarter,” said Gautam Duggad, head of research at Motilal Oswal Institutional Equities.“We expect 14% and 18% revenue and earnings growth in Q3FY18 for Sensex companies and 15%/22% revenue and earnings growth in FY19,” Duggad added.Analysts are concerned about the impact of rising oil and commodity prices that could hurt the margins of consumer companies. Rupee appreciation could take its toll on export-oriented sectors including information technology and pharmaceuticals. Brent crude prices jumped 16.21%, the rupee gained 2.2% and the Bloomberg Commodity Index rallied 4.39% in the three months ended December. Elevated bond yields, which will dent treasury income, and higher bad-loan provisions may hurt banks, said Dhiraj Sachdev, vice president and senior fund manager, HSBC Asset Management.“Earnings growth is likely to be over 20% in FY19 for broader indices. GST fallout on growth in first half will sustain downgrades for FY18 earnings estimated at the beginning of the year. However, this should recede with possible upgrades on cyclical recovery in FY19,” Sachdev added.Earnings revival is critical for the rich valuations of Indian markets to sustain. Currently, the Nifty is trading at 18.95 times its expected earnings for the current fiscal. Bloomberg data shows Nifty companies’ consensus earnings per share forecast for the current fiscal has fallen 8.5% since April; for fiscal 2018-19, it has been cut by 3.3%.Though the Indian markets were among the best performers of 2017, with the Sensex gaining 36.02% in dollar terms, high valuations amid continuous earnings downgrades may dam the flow of liquidity which drove equities to record highs last year.