Growth in non-governmental GVA is almost back to 2012-13 levels.For a few quarters, take all year-on-year (y-o-y) growth figures about the Indian economy with a pinch of salt. That’s because they will now be boosted due to the favourable effect of a low base. Since demonetisation and the introduction of the goods and services tax (GST) led to a downturn in the economy, y-o-y numbers will now show high growth.For example, the 6.4% y-o-y growth in gross value added (GVA), at constant prices, projected by the Central Statistics Office (CSO) for the second half of FY18 looks good, compared with 5.8% GVA growth in the first half. But is it really a big improvement? The 5.8% GVA growth in the first half of FY18 came on top of a 7.2% growth in the first half of FY17, while the 6.4% growth came on top of a plunge in growth to 6.1% in the second half of FY17. So the recovery projected by CSO in the second half is below expectations, which is why several economists are saying it’s likely to be revised upward. What the CSO’s estimates indicate is that the economic recovery is going to be a shallow, U-shaped one.What else do the CSO estimates say?Growth in ‘trade, hotel, transport, communication and services related to broadcasting’ sector is estimated to slow in the second half, compared with the first half, in spite of a favourable base effect. Also, growth in the ‘financial, insurance, real estate and professional services’ group hasn’t gone up by much, compared with the hugely favourable base effect. This suggests private sector services will remain sluggish in the second half of the current fiscal. That fits in with data from the Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI), which show the recovery in services is far slower than that in manufacturing.Growth in the ‘public administration, defence and other expenses’, or the government part of GVA, is estimated at a massive 11% at constant prices in the second half of the current fiscal year, well above the 9.1% growth in the first half. There’s no base effect in this group. That means government expenditure is still propping up growth, perhaps as states implement the Pay Commission recommendations for their employees.Indeed, government expenditure has been supporting growth since 2016-17, helping to cushion the economy from the disruption inflicted on it by demonetization, the GST and the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act. The chart shows growth in non-government GVA (Total GVA less ‘public administration, defence and other expenses’) this fiscal year is estimated by CSO to be barely above the growth in 2012-13 and well below that in 2013-14. For the second half of FY18, non-government GVA growth is projected at 5.8% y-o-y.What are the factors that will affect growth? Higher crude oil prices are an obvious headwind, while the tailwinds are higher consumption as the states implement pay revisions, higher exports as the world economy strengthens and a pick-up in investment demand as business optimism recovers. What do CSO’s advance estimates tell us about these factors?Exports of goods and services are predicted to grow 4.5% in 2017-18, the same as last year. But export growth is expected to spurt to 7.6% in the second half of FY18, compared with a mere 1.2% growth in first half. So the growth in exports due to stronger global trade has been taken into account.Growth in imports in the second half has been pegged at 17%, well above the growth of 10.4% for the first half. But the drag on GDP from negative net exports will be lower in the second half than in the first.What about investment demand? Growth in gross fixed capital formation is projected to rise to 5.9% in the second half of the current fiscal, compared with 3.1% in the first half. But the base effect is at work here, which should temper the optimism and which ties in with anecdotal evidence about the sluggishness of investment demand.Private consumption growth in the second half decelerates sharply in the second half, according to the CSO’s predictions, but there’s a large amount under ‘discrepancies’ in the GDP figures, which will at a later date be distributed among the various heads; so, it’s rather pointless to read too much into the expenditure numbers.The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) had, in its last monetary policy report, projected real GVA growth at 7.1% in Q3 and 7.7% in Q4 of the current fiscal, a far cry from the 6.4% growth predicted by CSO for the second half. That should normally have called for a re-think on the central bank’s part about its monetary policy stance. But at the moment, uncertainties abound. The fiscal deficit is under pressure, crude oil and commodity prices are strong, and the government will probably give a boost to farm prices before the next general election. These factors will prevent RBI from easing policy further and, like many economists, it may disagree with CSO about its growth predictions.As for markets, they are already looking at FY19 and FY20 earnings growth in order to justify stock valuations. In the current environment, while CSO’s growth estimates will be a disappointment, it will very likely be explained away soon as the market tries to find new and innovative reasons to extend the rally.
The Renault Kwid. The new global compact car will be less than four metres in length and is expected to make its debut in India in 2019. Photo: Ramesh Pathania/MintNew Delhi: Buoyed by the success of its global mini car Kwid, French auto maker Renault SA is working on yet another global compact car in India entailing an investment of up to $400 million, a person with direct knowledge of the matter said.The car, being designed and developed by the Renault-Nissan Technical Centre in Chennai, will be less than four metres in size and is expected to make its debut in the local market in 2019, the person said on condition of anonymity. Sub-4m cars attract less tax—28% GST and 1-3% cess (depending on the fuel)—compared to bigger vehicles.The company has tried to modify its CMF-A platform, which was developed in India for the Kwid. It also plans to come out with a compact sport utility vehicle (SUV) on the platform later.The move is aimed at consolidating Renault’s position in India and fill gaps in its existing product portfolio.The two products will be introduced in the premium hatchback and compact SUV segments (sub-4m), said a second person in the know. “(These) are being developed at the R&D (research and development) facility in Chennai just like its successful small car Kwid,” this person said.“The company could also showcase them as concept cars in the upcoming Auto Expo. The vendors have also been intimated about the plan. Apart from these two, Renault is also working on different other products but they are at a very nascent stage,” the second person said.A Renault spokesperson said: “As per company policy, we cannot comment on future products; however, we can assure you that whatever comes from Renault, it will be a game changer, which will redefine the segment, or create a sub-segment.”Sales of Kwid have started to ease and with the likely introduction of the new Alto by Maruti Suzuki India Ltd in 2018-19, competition is likely to increase. Captur, Renault’s new offering—a compact SUV—has not managed to meet expectations since it was launched in October. Sales of the Duster have also been on the decline.To be sure, Renault’s and its chief executive officer Carlos Ghosn’s previous attempts to crack the cost-sensitive small car market had little success before they built the Kwid, which was launched in 2015. While the original Logan caught on unexpectedly in Europe, the Indian version, built through a joint venture with Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd (M&M), failed to draw customers. Renault scrapped its production venture with M&M in 2008. After that, Renault partnered with Bajaj Auto Ltd to build an ultra-cheap car to counter Tata Motors Ltd’s Nano. The project was abandoned in 2011.Then came the Duster, which was launched in 2012 and changed Renault’s fortunes in India. And, finally, in 2015, it got its small car right.To be sure, owing to its SUV design and localization drive (98% of its components are made in India) that brought down the cost of Kwid’s spare parts to at least 17% less than components that go into India’s best-selling car, the Maruti Alto, the French firm commands a share of around 4% in the world’s fastest growing car market, making Renault the highest selling car brand from the West in India.Renault has achieved the feat in just five years of active operations even as its American and European counterparts, who have been in the country for longer, continue to struggle.Puneet Gupta, associate director, automotive forecasting, IHS Automotive, says Renault is the most aggressive global carmaker in India today and can be a real threat to companies such as Mahindra and Maruti in the long run.“In the last decade, Renault has not only been quick enough to understand the needs of the Indian customers but also has been able to develop India-centric products locally—a true example of ‘Make in India,” added Gupta.Mercedes-Benz India’s sales growth dipped marginally after the GST cess hike in September. Photo: Pradeep Gaur/MintMumbai: Luxury car market leader Mercedes-Benz India Pvt. Ltd sold 15,330 units in calendar year 2017, a 16% increase over the previous year, it said on Monday.Volumes were driven by sedans, sport utility vehicles (SUVs) and the German automaker’s high performance division AMG, the company said. The maker of the E-Class sedan presently sells over a dozen models in India, including the GLC and GLA SUVs.Mercedes’ first launch of 2018, the Mercedes-Maybach S 650 sedan, is expected to be on display at the Auto Expo at New Delhi in mid-February.To be sure, sales growth dipped marginally after the goods and services tax (GST) cess hike in September. At 11,869, the bulk of the units were sold in the January-to-September period, marking a 25% year-on-year rise.The effect was not as pronounced for other luxury carmakers such as BMW India Pvt. Ltd, Audi India Pvt. Ltd and Jaguar Land Rover Automotive Plc, which announced their sales figures last week.Overall, the luxury car market, accounting for less than 1% of total four-wheeler sales, grew close to 20% on the back of a low base in 2016 and a bevy of launches during the year.