Mark Mobius, executive chairman, Templeton Emerging Markets Group. Photo: Aniruddha Chowdhury/MintMark Mobius might not have been the best-performing emerging-market fund manager, but his name has been more synonymous with the idea of investing in businesses from developing economies than any other.So, on 31 January, when the 81-year-old retires from Franklin Templeton Investments after 30 years, it will mark the passing of an era.This period has seen him embrace, in sequence, Hong Kong, South Africa, South Korea, Brazil and China.In some year or the other, beginning 1995, each of these five countries led the portfolio of Templeton Emerging Market Investment Trust—the best-known Templeton emerging-market investing vehicle that Mobius managed. But never India, despite the unstinting optimism he voiced for the country in public. India was a steady crawl in the Trust’s portfolio: from 0.6% in 1995 to 3.9% in 2005. In 2010, this spiked to 14.5%—an all-time high—and two Indian companies featured in the fund’s overall top 10 holdings.But by March 2015, this had fallen to 5.6%. By March 2016, the Trust’s exposure to India increased to 9% and the number of Indian stocks to 12.But in the year when demonetisation happened and the Goods and Services Tax (GST) became imminent, the Trust cut its India exposure to 6.1%, its sixth largest holding in a portfolio worth £2.1 billion.The Trust’s Indian holdings have been mainly in stodgy, old economy, industrial businesses. By contrast, the latest released list of top 10 holdings of the fund—in which there’s no Indian company—consists entirely of consumer and information technology (IT) businesses.
howindialives.com is a database and search engine for public data.Despite GST now being implemented for more than six months, businesses continue to grapple with a slew of challenges. Photo: PTIWorried about the steadily declining goods and services tax (GST) revenue collection, the GST Council, in a meeting last month, advanced the implementation of the e-way bill for interstate movement of goods to 1 February from 1 April. The government suspects large tax evasion, especially by small and medium enterprises, and feels this would help check it.The next step to further plug this revenue leakage could be reintroduction of the reverse charge mechanism. Here, large entities are required to pay taxes on purchase from unregistered smaller companies.In October, the council deferred implementation of reverse charge by six months. According to some media reports and tax experts, the council may take a call on it at its meeting on 18 January.To put the issue in perspective, the concept of reverse charge is not new. It has been in practice from the time service tax was introduced and was first applied to the insurance sector, say tax experts. It was followed by covering mutual funds under its purview and gradually extending to goods transporters, works contracts, sponsors and brand ambassadors.In the first two cases, the purpose of tax collection was met to a certain extent because the nature of the industry is such where receipts are few and there are many providers. For the rest, it was implemented because these industries were highly unorganized, add tax experts.When introduced under GST in July last year, an addition was made. The levy of reverse charge got extended from a few services to all unregistered goods suppliers and services providers falling under the GST ambit.But it failed to widen the tax base and added to the compliance burden of companies already struggling to adjust to the new tax regime; so, it had to be temporarily shelved.Despite GST now being implemented for more than six months, businesses continue to grapple with a slew of challenges, raising doubts about the success of the reverse charge implementation at this time.“The reintroduction of reverse charge on transactions with unregistered dealers would result in businesses having to make process and compliance changes. Some businesses may not want to deal with unregistered dealers; hence, many businesses which are below the threshold may end up taking registration in order to ensure business continuity. Reverse charge is applied on certain transactions in the European Union as well, but in India, it would be preferable to go in for a phased approach once initial hurdles are overcome” said M.S. Mani, senior director (indirect tax) at Deloitte Haskins and Sells Llp.While the number of registrations might rise once reverse charge is implemented, it would not generate additional revenue for the government because tax paid by the recipient company on behalf of an unregistered supplier will be given as input credit to the former, pointed out Anita Rastogi, indirect tax partner at PwC India. She suggested scrapping of reverse charge on supplies from unregistered dealers at least for the next three-four years.“Reverse charge on other categories like import of services is fine because it is a global concept to pay tax on imports under reverse charge. Yes, GST tax collections have been lower than anticipated, but in a knee-jerk reaction, if the government rushes with reverse charge just like it is doing with e-way bills, it will only cause more damage,” cautioned Rastogi.There are, of course, contrary views over the decision.For instance, Abhishek Jain, partner at EY, pointed out, “One may argue that with just registrations going up, how can revenues get a boost since reverse charge paid will be treated as an input credit? But it should be noted that with more number of smaller entities registering, the turnover of these small firms, which might otherwise be under- reported, can come under the government’s radar and that could boost GST as well as income-tax collections.”The fact remains, though, that tools like e-way bills and reverse charge will tighten the government’s ability to track transactions, making survival for some small businesses difficult, while increasing the cost of doing business for others.
World Bank, however, revised downward India’s growth estimate for 2017 to 6.7% from 7% projected in October last year, blaming ‘short-term disruptions from the newly introduced GST’. Photo: Priyanka Parashar/MintAfter conceding its position as the fastest growing major economy to China for a year in 2017, India is likely to reclaim the position in 2018, with growth expected to accelerate to 7.3% in the year, according to the World Bank’s Global Economic Prospects report released on Wednesday.The report projected China’s economic growth to slow to 6.4% in 2018 from 6.8% in 2017. The World Bank also revised India’s growth estimate for 2017 to 6.7% from 7% projected in October, blaming short-term disruptions caused by the newly introduced goods and services tax (GST) and a softer-than-envisioned recovery in private investment.To be sure, the estimates are on a different fiscal year basis for each country. India’s fiscal year runs from April to March. China follows a January-December fiscal year.The global economy, meanwhile, is experiencing a broad-based cyclical upturn, which is expected to be sustained over the next couple of years, although downside risks persist, the World Bank said.“In contrast, growth in potential output is flagging, languishing below its longer-term and pre-crisis average both globally and among emerging market and developing economies. The forces depressing potential output growth will continue unless countered by structural policies,” it cautioned.Global growth is projected to edge up to 3.1% in 2018, as growth in advanced economies is projected to slow while growth in emerging economies is expected to accelerate.India’s statistics office on Friday projected the economy to slow to 6.5% in 2017-18 from 7.1% a year ago. The economy has been hurt by the lingering impact of demonetization and disruptions caused by GST.Moody’s Investors Service in a report released on Wednesday said India and China remain the fastest growth economies in the Asia-Pacific region.“A gradual moderation in growth in China and temporary slowdown in India will be balanced by robust growth trends in other Asian economies,” it added.Economic affairs secretary Subhash Chandra Garg tweeted: “World Bank releases its GDP growth estimates. India projected to grow at 6.7% in 2017. Higher growth of 7.3% projected for 2018. Impressive advance corporate tax payments in 3rd quarter indicates India’s growth turnaround to be much better.”Direct tax collections grew by more than 18% in the first nine months (April-December) of the fiscal year 2017-18 to two-thirds of the full-year target, which is expected to provide a breather to the government as it struggles to contain the fiscal deficit.“In all likelihood, India is going to register higher growth rate than other major emerging market economies in the next decade. So, I wouldn’t focus on the short-term numbers. I would look at the big picture for India and big picture is telling us that it has enormous potential,” Ayhan Kose, director, development prospects group, World Bank, told PTI in an interview.The World Bank said strong private consumption and services are expected to continue to support economic activity. “Private investment is expected to revive as the corporate sector adjusts to the GST; infrastructure spending increases, partly to improve public services and internet connectivity; and private sector balance sheet weaknesses are mitigated with the help of the efforts of the government and the Reserve Bank of India,” it said.Over the medium term, GST is expected to benefit economic activity and fiscal sustainability by reducing the cost of complying with multiple state tax systems, drawing informal activity into the formal sector, and expanding the tax base. it said. “The recent recapitalization package for public sector banks announced by the government of India is expected to help resolve banking sector balance sheets, support credit to the private sector, and lift investment. The global trade recovery is expected to lift exports,” it added.The Bank said key risks to India are domestic in nature such as setbacks to reforms to resolve corporate and financial sector balance sheet deterioration and debt write-offs for farmers.“Corporate debt overhangs and high levels of non-performing loans have been long-standing concerns in some countries (e.g. Bangladesh, India). Setbacks in efforts to resolve these domestic bottlenecks would continue to weigh on investment, and more broadly on medium-term growth prospects in the region,” it added.“Weak private investment was only partly mitigated by a public infrastructure investment push and a surge in current expenditures after recent public pay hikes,” the report said.
While Marico gradually increased prices between December 2016 and November 2017, brands by Dabur and Emami largely held on to their prices. Photo: MintMumbai: Hair oils saw the least pricing action last year, with most companies, including Marico, Dabur and Emami, going for no changes in at least two quarters. However, that may no longer be possible as these manufacturers are set to face pressure from rising raw material costs.While Marico gradually increased prices between December 2016 and November 2017, brands by Dabur and Emami largely held on to their prices.The prices of liquid light paraffin (LLP), mentha oil, copra, and coconut oil are among the fastest rising among relatively flat prices of key raw materials.Prices of mentha oil have risen the most with a 107% increase in the last one year, and 93.6% in the last six months. Meanwhile, prices of light liquid paraffin—a key component of hair oils—has risen 35.3% in the last year and 8.9% in the last six months, as per data compiled by equities brokerage firm Jefferies.For Marico, copra prices are the biggest headache with prices rising 92% in the last one year even as the company increased prices of the Parachute Hair oil 100ml by 13% in the last six months, according to data compiled by equities brokerage firm Kotak Institutional Equities Research.A spokesperson for Marico declined to comment.Dabur has kept prices of its Dabur Vatika Hair oil unchanged in the last 12 months, data from Kotak shows.“We are witnessing inflationary pressure in select category of commodities,” Lalit Malik, chief financial officer, Dabur Ltd, said in an email reply. “We are monitoring the input price movement and shall take appropriate actions based on impact on margins and competitive scenario.”Margins of Vatika coconut hair oil saw pressure during the quarter ended September 2017 because of rapidly rising copra prices, CEO Sunil Duggal had said during an earnings call on 31 October.This comes at a time when FMCG firms are being closely watched under the anti-profiteering rules of the new goods and services tax (GST) regime. Hair oils saw tax rates fall to 18% under GST compared to 23-24% in the old VAT regime, prompting the government and consumers to expect a fall in prices.“Amid GST-related rate cuts, consumer companies have refrained from taking price hikes despite inflationary pressure building in,” Varun Lohchab, an analyst at Jefferies, wrote in a note dated 29 December. “We expect consumer companies to start taking selective price hikes from Q4FY18 (quarter ending March 2018) onwards.”“A sharp spike in LLP is likely to hurt hair oil companies like Marico, Emami, Dabur and Bajaj Corp,” said Rohit Chordia, analyst at Kotak Institutional Equities, in a note dated 21 December. “Sustained inflation in copra prices is likely to hurt Marico; our checks suggest that Marico is likely to initiate another round of price hikes in Parachute CNO (coconut oil) portfolio over the next few weeks,” he said, adding that steep rise in mentha oil prices is likely to impact Emami, whose biggest hair oil brand is Navratan Cool.India’s consumption of petroleum products rose 2 percent to about 200 million tonnes, the oil ministry’s Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell said. Photo: AFP
Mumbai: India’s oil consumption in 2017 expanded at the slowest pace in four years as a surprise ban on high-value currency notes and a new national sales tax weakened the economy.The nation’s consumption of petroleum products rose 2% to about 200 million tonnes, the oil ministry’s Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell said Wednesday. That’s the slowest since 2013, when demand grew 1.7% while global oil prices averaged about $109 a barrel, almost double last year’s level.“The cash ban had a bigger impact on oil demand in the first half, while the goods and services tax impacted the second half,” Nevyn Nah, an oil products analyst at Energy Aspects, said by phone from Singapore, adding that good rainfall during the monsoon season also lowered diesel demand.Growth slowed down in the world’s second-most populous nation after Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s unprecedented cash ban in 2016 and the chaotic rollout of a goods and services tax (GST) last year. India forecast its economy will expand 6.5% in the year through March, the slowest pace since Modi came to power in 2014.India’s slowdown last year followed the 11% surge in 2016, the biggest gain on record, spurred by rising income levels that propelled greater use of cars, trucks and motorbikes.The cash ban and the new tax hit truckers the hardest, affecting demand for diesel as they are the largest consumers of the fuel in India. Diesel accounts for almost 40% of the country’s oil products use.The International Energy Agency, which expects the country to be the fastest-growing oil consumer through 2040, cut its 2017 demand forecast for India at least three times, following sharp fluctuations in monthly consumption. The agency estimated India’s oil demand growth at 135,000 barrels a day in 2017 and 275,000 barrels a day in 2018.India’s total oil products consumption grew 7.5% in December, the most in three months. The country consumed about 17 million tons of oil products last month, up from about 16 million tons a year earlier.“The worst is over,” Nah said. “As the government embarks on pro-growth policy to revive the economy and consolidate electoral support before the 2019 general election, Indian oil demand growth is likely to pick up strongly.” Bloomberg