The RBI may also increase the rates if crude prices firm up further or there is a sharp rupee fall or if global monetary policy changes, DBS Bank says. Photo: Aniruddha Chowdhury/MintMumbai: With the latest inflation prints moving up, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is likely to raise its inflation forecast for March and may leave the key rates unchanged in the upcoming policy review next month, says a report.Retail inflation based on consumer price index (CPI), inched up to 5.21% in December from 4.88% in November, while headline inflation based on wholesale prices eased to 3.58% in December from 3.93% in November.DBS Bank in a report on Monday said firm inflation at a time when growth is showing early signs of a revival and fiscal slippage risks are on the rise, puts the central bank in a tight spot. “The upcoming February’s policy review is likely to see RBI raise its FY18 inflation forecasts and lower the growth projection, currently at 6.7 per cent. We expect the benchmark repo rate to be held unchanged at 6 per cent next month,” the report said.In the December review, RBI had increased its inflation forecast in the range 4.3-4.7% in Q3 and Q4 from 4.2-4.6% estimated in the October review. DBS said clear guidance from RBI in the upcoming policy will be key in guiding the markets, going ahead.“If the central bank perceives the current bout of firm inflation as transient as the impact of one-off factors like GST, spike rental allowances, and base effects, to roll off, rates are likely to remain on a prolonged pause,” the report said. It has currently factored in no change in rates in 2018 and two 25 basis points hikes next year.The report, however, said policy tightening moves may be brought forward to mid-2018 (one 25 bps hike) if the budget due carries signs of a sharp fiscal slippages due to a jump in spending or if food prices increases as there are concerns that this year’s supply glut in some crops might lead to a shift in production trends next year and a concomitant shortage in supply.The RBI may also increase the rates if crude prices firm up further or there is a sharp rupee fall or if global monetary policy changes. “A combination of these factors could push inflation past 5 per cent on a sustained basis,” the report added.
In December, imports of precious stones rose 94%, and those of gold and petroleum rose by 71.5% and 35%, respectively. Photo: BloombergNew Delhi: India’s trade deficit shot up to a three-year high in December as imports of gold, precious stones and crude oil surged during the month.Data released by the commerce ministry showed merchandise exports rose 12.4% in December while merchandise imports rose 21.12%. Import of precious stones rose 94%, and those of gold and petroleum rose by 71.5% and 35%, respectively.During the first nine months of the financial year, the trade deficit expanded to $114.8 billion against $78.4 billion during the same period a year ago as imports grew faster than exports.In December, exports of gems and jewellery (2.4%), drugs and pharmaceuticals (7%), chemicals (31.4%), engineering goods (25.3%), and petroleum products (25.2%) rose while shipments of readymade garments declined by 8.1%.Exporters had complained that the imposition of integrated goods and services tax (GST) and delays in refund of input tax credits were hurting overseas shipments, prompting the GST council to continue two pre-GST era schemes that allow duty-free sourcing of materials for export production until March 2018. Exporters insist duty refunds under GST have been tardy.Growth in non-oil, non-gems and jewellery imports that reflects the state of economic activity in the country rose 9%, led by an increase in imports of machine tools (9%), electrical and non-electrical machinery (11.2%). Import of transport equipment declined by 24.3%.Imports of coal (18.5%), chemicals (21%), plastics (11%), precious stones (94%), non-ferrous metals (30%) and electronic goods (19.2%) also expanded in December.The WTO’s latest world trade outlook indicator (WTOI) also suggests that global merchandise trade growth likely moderated in the December quarter of 2017. For 2017, WTO has projected trade expansion at 3.6% following stronger-than-expected trade growth in the first half of the year.Services exports growth picked up sharply to a 44-month high at 15.4% in November from 7.9% in October, leading to services surplus to $5.7 billion during the month.Aditi Nayar, principal economist at ICRA Ltd, said the rating company expects the current account deficit to record considerable deterioration in forthcoming quarters.“Overall, the current account deficit is likely to widen nearly three-fold to $ 42-44 billion in FY2018 from $15 billion in FY2017,” she said.
India’s renewable energy capacity, as of October 2017, stands close to 61 GW. Photo: BloombergThe 2018 budget announcement expected on 1 February will be the last full-year budget before the country goes to polls in 2019. Three years after the first formal announcement of the upscaled renewable energy targets in finance minister Arun Jaitley’s budget speech of 2015, will the upcoming budget signal the government’s continued commitment to clean energy?India’s renewable energy capacity, as of October 2017, stands close to 61 GW. Wind energy dominates with 33 GW of installed operational capacity, followed by 15.5 GW of solar, 4.4 GW of small hydro, and 8 GW of bio-power. While sizeable, this is significantly short of the 175 GW renewable energy capacity target set for 2022.Will the government back up its vision with effective policies to scale up renewable energy, support domestic manufacturing, and skill the workforce? Or will the sector merely rely on wishful thinking?The renewable energy industry, once growing at a rapid pace, has become mired in uncertainty. Financial year 2017-18 has seen a dampening in the dynamism of the renewable energy sector, due to a lack of policy clarity, fiscal changes, trade policy uncertainty, regulatory hurdles, and reduced commissioning of projects. While some of these challenges could be addressed with non-budgetary action, it would be wise for the budget to respond to some pressing issues that could result in market failures if left unaddressed.The most important fiscal reform of 2017 exacerbated some of the challenges plaguing the clean energy sector. The adoption of the goods and services tax (GST), which brought down the tax on coal to 5%, previously taxed at 11.69%, was also accompanied by the coal cess being subsumed in the GST compensation fund. Coal taxed at Rs400 per tonne, previously accrued into the National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF), was used to make budgetary allocations to environment and clean energy related ministries and schemes. Additionally, the unspent cess amount collected over the years has been used to compensate states for their loss of revenue due to GST dealing a further blow to the renewable energy sector.Since 2011, a bulk of the budgetary allocation to the ministry of new and renewable energy (MNRE) came from the NCEF. In 2017-18, of the Rs5,473 crore allocation to MNRE, Rs5,342 crore came from the NCEF. In the absence of the NCEF, the budgetary allocation to MNRE, as well as financing of mechanisms and schemes that spur further renewable energy deployment, would be the acid test of the upcoming budget.Another source of uncertainty in solar is the duty being considered on imported solar modules, either in the form of a temporary safeguard duty or a long-term anti-dumping duty. China, Taiwan and Malaysia currently manufacture 90% of the solar modules used in Indian projects. India’s domestic solar manufacturing capacity is too small and inadequate to meet the growing demand from developers. The solar manufacturing sector that has long argued for budgetary and policy support, will also see this budget as a watershed moment for the government to walk the talk on its “Make In India” programme.However, while making domestic manufacturing more competitive, the imposition of duties on imported solar products will raise the cost of solar power for developers. This, in turn, will lower the competitiveness of solar electricity, and increase the burden on the already financially overburdened utilities. This presents a real tightrope for the government to walk.Will making the solar manufacturing industry more competitive make solar power uncompetitive? A more strategic manufacturing policy is needed. In the long run, trade remedies do not help build an industry.New and innovative means are needed to build new markets for visionary targets. In addition to large renewable energy projects, policies to spur greater development in the solar rooftop and electric mobility sectors have become increasingly important. In the 2018 budget announcement, the government must focus on ways to use public money most effectively. Ring-fenced pools of public money could be earmarked for innovative financial mechanisms that result in greater investment of private capital, especially from relatively untapped sources such as pension funds, insurance companies, and sovereign wealth funds. Using this budgetary support to underwrite risks, increase the flow of private capital, and lower the cost of finance, could result in the creation of deep, vibrant and self-sustaining markets in renewable energy and its affiliated sectors.Internationally, a seat has opened up at the global climate leadership head table with the exit of the US from the Paris Climate Change Agreement. India, with its mammoth clean energy transition ambitions, is well-placed to take that seat. However, we must demonstrate real leadership by translating our ambition into action. This will require the development of clear policy pathways and support mechanisms to nurture these new markets.In order to advance national priorities like energy security, energy access, job creation and increased domestic manufacturing as well as to display international climate leadership, India must show the renewable energy sector some budgetary money.Kanika Chawla is senior programme lead at the Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW), an independent not-for-profit policy research organization.Comments are welcome at theirview@livemint.com