The goods and services tax (GST) crosses a milestone on Tuesday when it clocks 200 days. But, as insiders and experts argue, the new tax regime is bracing for fresh disruptions as the next steps in the seminal reform are rolled out.Especially since Indian industry—particularly small and medium enterprises—is still grappling with frequent changes in the tax and demanding compliance requirements. Presumably these challenges will dominate the deliberations of the GST Council, which will assemble in the capital on 18 January for its 25th meeting.The challengesA big concern has been the failure of companies to pass through the benefits of the reduction in tax rates to consumers. Although companies such as Apple Inc., Hindustan Unilever Ltd and Hero MotoCorp. Ltd reduced prices of some of their products, an across-the-board cut is yet to be seen.On the other hand, lenient oversight in the first 200 days and deferment of key steps such as the e-way bill (which carry details of goods being transported) to check tax evasion have led to massive revenue leakages, in turn resulting in falling tax collections for the government. The fact that the government will get only 11 months of indirect tax revenue this fiscal adds to the concerns of the exchequer.Political compulsions have forced the GST Council to undertake a reduction in tax rates, which also squeezes revenue receipts. Tax revenues fell sharply to Rs80,808 crore in December from Rs94,063 crore in August—the first month of tax collections. This has raised the risk of the Union government breaching its 3.2% of GDP fiscal deficit target this fiscal year.Disruption alertMassive changes are on the anvil to address tax evasion and to further simplify the tax code, especially classification of items.The GST Council—the federal body comprising Union finance minister Arun Jaitley and state finance ministers—decided to move up the roll-out date of the e-way bill system by two months to 1 February after detecting instances of widespread tax evasion; this loss is estimated at around Rs30,000 crore.An e-way bill will have to be generated for all movement of goods—within or outside a state—amounting to more than Rs50,000 by prior online registration of the consignment. The supplier and the transporter can upload the details about the shipment and get a unique e-way bill number.As the implementation date nears, the industry is worried about harassment by tax officials and in effect a disruption to the free movement of goods within India.With expectation of a further simplification in the returns process and a possibility of combining some of the return forms, industry is also bracing for another round of changes under the new indirect tax regime, which was implemented on 1 July.The reverse charge mechanism, which requires big businesses to pay tax while making purchases from an unregistered dealer, and the process of invoice matching will also be implemented in the next few months.Industry resents the hasty implementation of the tax without adequate time for the back-end GST network and hopes that the experience is not repeated in the implementation of the e-way bill.“The experience so far has not been great. There have been changes every now and then. Further, experience of businesses with regards to compliance has not been good on the ground. Realistic reduction in prices has still not come in and may take some more time. We should be able to gauge the impact of GST by March or April,” said Suresh Nandlal Rohira, a partner at Grant Thornton India LLP.“Going ahead, the service industry wants the match-and-mismatch concept under return filing to be done away with. Further, any challenges with respect to systems of e-way bill should be addressed to ensure there are no hiccups unlike the initial problems faced while filing tax returns. Octroi check posts are being done away with but they should not be replaced by mobile check posts,” he said.Further rationalization of rates should also be looked into, he added.With expectation of a further simplification in the returns process and a possibility of combining some of the return forms, industry is also bracing for another round of changes under the new indirect tax regime, which was implemented on 1 July.“Industry has to prepare its systems for invoicing, filing tax returns and claiming input tax credit. E-way bill introduction will increase compliance requirements,” said Archit Gupta, chief executive officer of Cleartax.in, which has ventured into helping firms file their tax returns under GST.
GST has economically united the country through the underlying notion of “One Nation, One Tax, One Market”. Photo: PTIThe implementation of the goods and services tax (GST) from 1 July 2017 was a landmark event in the economic history of India as it brought about a paradigm shift in the indirect tax regime of the country. Many have termed it a “game changer” and others a transformative economic reform. Six months is too short a period to evaluate any mega reform as it takes time for the gains to emerge and percolate down. Nevertheless, it is a good time for stocktaking and evaluating what has been achieved and what further needs to be done to reap maximum benefits in the long run.There is a general unanimity among all economists and stakeholders that the introduction of GST has been a success despite some initial hiccups. In my view, five significant gains that have accrued to the country are:Firstly, GST has economically united the country through the underlying notion of “One Nation, One Tax, One Market”. Many argue that we are still far away from the concept of “One tax” due to the presence of four GST rates. It needs to be appreciated that barring a few high-income countries, most, including developed countries, generally have two-three tax rates. What India has been able to achieve is uniform indirect tax regime throughout the country by subsuming more than a dozen central and state indirect taxes. This will reduce the compliance burden of the taxpayers in a big way.Secondly, barring a few exceptions like Canada and Brazil, in most countries GST has been implemented as a central tax and taxes collected are subsequently devolved to the states. However, keeping in view India’s federal structure, we have been successful in rolling out GST incorporating bold concepts of dual GST and integrated GST (IGST). Dual GST has ensured that the states have constitutional power to levy GST along with the centre and IGST has ensured that GST truly remains a destination-based consumption tax.Thirdly, in the pre-GST era, value-added tax administrations of the states operated at varied levels of efficiency and effectiveness. Post-GST, all have moved on to a uniform information technology (IT)-enabled environment wherein all taxpayers, small or big, have to transact through a single portal being managed by the Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN). The GSTN system virtually eliminates interaction of the taxpayer with the tax authorities as all processes including registration, filing of returns and tax payments have been enabled online. The shift is a quantum leap for many states.Fourthly, it has been possible to largely do away with interstate commercial tax barriers. Now there is no scope for tax arbitration between the states as tax rates are uniform throughout the country. This has resulted in faster movement of trucks, reduced logistic costs and led to huge energy savings.Fifthly, the GST Council has emerged as a unique institution capable of taking quick decisions through consensus in the true spirit of cooperative federalism.Mega economic reforms take time to stabilize, but yield long-term benefits. Such reforms stay as a work in progress for some time and the council, GSTN and the tax administrators both at the centre and the states have their task cut out for them for some time. The five key tasks for further smoothening the new tax regime are:Firstly, GSTN has to put all the resources at its command to make its IT system more robust and user-friendly. It needs to implement remaining modules, make more offline utilities and ensure that GST Suvidha Providers develop required packages to cater to the needs of various segments of taxpayers. The group of ministers under the chairmanship of Sushil Modi, deputy chief minister of Bihar, has done commendable work by identifying the milestones, prioritizing them and closely monitoring them.Secondly, focus has to now shift to plugging loopholes and ensuring better compliance. The GST Council, in its 24th meeting on 9 December, took a welcome decision to introduce interstate e-way bills with effect from 1 February. Flexibility has been provided to the states to implement intra-state e-way bills by 1 June. The e-way bill system is already being implemented successfully in Karnataka and is being scaled up to make it pan-India. The gradual approach adopted for e-way bills should make its roll-out smooth.Thirdly, the launch of GST did result in initial problems for the exporting community due to blockage of their working capital. The GST Council was quick to constitute a committee under the chairmanship of revenue secretary Hasmukh Adhia to look into the problems of the exporters. The committee recommended a number of short-term measures which have been implemented and immediate concerns of the exporters have been addressed. As a long-term solution, the council also decided to introduce an e-wallet scheme for exporters. The introduction of the e-wallet scheme will ensure that the chain of free flow of input tax credit is not broken and there is an in-built self-policing mechanism.Fourthly, the council has shown resilience in responding to the needs of the common man as well as trade and industry by rationalizing the rates of many goods and services and removing ambiguities. There is always scope for further rationalization and issuing clarifications with a view to minimizing classification disputes and bringing about a common understanding in the field. The fitment committee will have to continue to work in that direction.Fifthly, the ultimate success of any tax regime lies in making it as simple as possible both for the taxpayers and tax administrators. The GST Council has constituted a committee under the chairmanship of A.B. Pandey, chairman of GSTN and chief executive of the Unique Identification Authority of India, to simplify filing of returns without compromising on the basic tenets of the GST regime. In addition, a law review committee consisting of senior officials of the centre and the states is in the process of recommending changes in the GST laws so as to make the regime simple, taxpayer-friendly, and to address the concerns of medium and small enterprises. The reports of the committees are to be discussed in the forthcoming meeting of the GST Council on 18 January, and taxpayers can expect further simplification and improvements.What has been achieved in a short span of six months is indeed transformative and path-breaking. As the new tax regime stabilizes, one can expect a larger tax base, buoyancy in GST revenues, more exports and foreign direct investment, improvement in ease of doing business, and a boost to “Make in India”.Arun Goyal is an Indian Administrative Service officer and is currently working as special secretary in the GST Council. The views expressed are personal.
Industry is concerned whether e-way bill would again lead to stoppage of trucks, impeding movements and delaying delivery timelines, which had started to improve with no check posts in GST. Photo: Hindustan TimesWith the introduction of the e-way bill scheduled for 1 February 2018, a contentious debate has begun on how this measure can be a serious impediment for goods movement, supply-chain efficiencies, harassment and rent seeking.While this concern is genuine, what has led to this decision has been slowing goods and services tax (GST) collections in the last few months, contributed to by a host of factors—namely reduction in rates, flow through of integrated GST (IGST) and other eligible credits and evasion in several pockets.While the effects of lower rates and credit utilization were expected, the evasion factor is what is of serious concern to revenue authorities. With the deferral of invoice level matching due to system stability issues, the checks and balances, which were inbuilt in this process, expose the value chain to potential evasion and loss of revenues.I understand that states where there were significant imports from other states in the legacy regime are seeing a huge drop in those numbers in GST, which they find difficult to digest, and believe goods are coming in without any documentary trails, leading to wide-scale evasion.With IGST applicable on all these interstate movements, the issue gets further complicated with potential arbitrage opportunities.So there is a case for introduction of e-way bills to act as a deterrent and create a trail of movement, but the fallout of its implementation can be equally worrisome. Industry is concerned whether this would again lead to stoppage of trucks, impeding movements and delaying delivery timelines, which had started to improve with no check posts in GST. Also the concern is how smoothly this will be implemented and its efficacy on the ground, considering the fact that logistics, specially truckers, is not an organized sector. With industry already grappling to come to terms with GST compliance, this e-way bill process they believe will be another arduous process to contend with in the initial months.The concern is that organized sectors will ensure compliance but that evaders will still find ways to skirt this process, which will lead to situations of collusion. Even in the legacy regime, e-way bills and other transportation documentations were in use for trail of goods movements but evasion still happened along with rent-seeking opportunities—that spectre may return to haunt the industry.It’s important we soon get back to invoice matching for credits albeit in a simplified form, which I am sure is being considered and will be implemented in the comings months. That to me is a more efficient mechanism to track the value chain for evasion and expansion of the tax base. The GST Council meeting slated for 18 January 2018, hopefully should look at all these aspects. But for the interim, industry will have to contend with the e-way bill process and bear this burden.Another area which I believe the council may look at is reverse charge mechanism, which was deferred till March 2018. With evasion a concern, there may be a temptation to bring this provision back to plug loopholes, though such GST paid through reverse charge (a mechanism wherein the buyer pays the tax on supplies purchased from an unregistered dealer) will be available in the credit chain. What this will provide, however, is potential expansion of database.Both GST and demonetization were to formalize the economy and expand the tax base, but considering the fact that India has a large expanse of micro, small and medium enterprises that generate a significant portion of employment, these moves have affected these clusters’ existence, leading to job losses. In some of these clusters, tax arbitrage was the reason for their competitiveness and existence, and with GST attempting to formalize these sectors through processes like invoice matching, e-way bill and reverse charge, there will be some collateral damages in the interim. But that’s a pill we will have to swallow to expand our tax base.Harishanker Subramaniam is national leader (indirect tax) at EY India. The views expressed are personal.A big issue that is impairing the efficacy of the GST regime is that the small businesses are bearing a disproportionate burden in accounting for transactions from the unregistered segment. Photo: Priyanka Parashar/MintThe six-month goods and services tax (GST) journey so far has seen technology, procedural compliance and policy withdrawals as speed breakers, but no serious roadblocks are in sight. The rate reductions, and alignments that were done by the GST Council have aided acceptance by various stakeholders. At the moment, the small businesses within the composition scheme are at the traffic light, which continues to be amber for them.
In the 200 days of the GST regime, the consumer hasn’t yet benefited as he ought to have, the taxman is struggling to come to terms with loss of control and authority, the businesses are getting used to the system, while small businesses are finding it difficult to cope with the new indirect tax regime and its attendant consequences. In general, the business-to-consumer segment is running well; the business-to-business sector continues to have hiccups.With the GST set-up, the technology piece is still clearly struggling, while the procedural and compliance part is better than what we started off with.In short, the system is up, transitional glitches have eased to a large extent and now some internal inconsistencies—essentially in the nature of attendant issues—are surfacing which will get evened out as we complete the first full cycle. The next 200 days, in terms of policy, should focus on restoring the reverse charge mechanism (RCM), putting in place a modified composition scheme with some form of input tax credit available (a model is suggested below) and restarting the e-way bill. These are the three short-term measures. But even prior to that is setting up the technology and design in order to make it simpler and more robust.In the medium-to-long term, the big measure that will take GST to next level in terms of effectiveness and change its dynamic vis-à-vis price formation at the retail level is doing away with the maximum retail price (MRP) system.The big surprise of the first 200 days is that a big producer state like Maharashtra has already made up for the revenue loss; even as the tax collection from “goods” is down, it has been more than made up by the “services” part. The consuming states, which were expected to be major gainers, are still falling short of revenue. This is more of a transition issue rather than a structural one. As such, the total need for compensation will not only be less but also limited to a period of less than five years. At least, that is how one reads the trends till now.These trends may require the GST Council to revisit the compensation scheme but more importantly, the compensation account; if it is in surplus or has it gone into a deficit?Post-this, a revisiting of the slab will be in order. If indeed the compensation requirement is less, the multiple rate slabs ought to converge sooner. More than rate cuts, the focus should be on how the two middle slabs of 12% and 18% will converge to 14.5% sooner than later. Along with this, the number of commodities attracting 28% will have to be, and will be, trimmed.The other area that needs to be sorted out is that of exports, especially the embedded taxes. We have to move away from an ad hoc solution to a proper mechanism.There seems to be some evidence that more than the growth of gross domestic product (GDP), GST seems to be having an impact on the structure of GDP. This needs to be studied as it will have long-term macroeconomic consequences.Actually, a big issue that is impairing the efficacy of the GST regime is that the small businesses are bearing a disproportionate burden in accounting for transactions from the unregistered segment. While technically RCM is required, the GST Council can help ease the small businesses into this system over time.However, what should be on top of the policymakers’ agenda is how to make GST attractive and relevant for the composition dealers. This is critical. As of now, dealers having a turnover up to Rs1.5 crore have an option to adopt the composition scheme in GST where they have to pay 1% composition tax in the case of traders, 2% in the case of manufacturers and 5% in the case of restaurants.An area that needs to be sorted out is that of exports, especially the embedded taxes. We have to move away from an ad hoc solution to a proper mechanism.No input tax credit is allowed to composition dealers and they are also not allowed to raise GST invoice enabling the buyer to take input tax credit. In the absence of availment of input tax credit, registered dealers are reluctant to make purchases from these composition dealers as compared to the purchases from registered dealers where they are in a position to get input tax credit.This has destabilized the supply chain and also affected purchases by registered dealers from the composition dealer. In the present scenario of GST, the composition dealer is neither eligible to get input tax credit even if he is buying from a registered dealer on a regular GST invoice nor is he allowed to raise GST invoice showing charge of GST equivalent to the composition rate.The purchases of registered dealers from the composition dealers involves a hidden component of tax equivalent to the composition rate, which is ultimately paid by the composition dealer. But the buyer cannot take input tax credit for the same due to the embargo placed by the statute.If a scenario is created to address this invisible part of tax charged by the composition dealer, the transactions between the composition dealer and the registered dealers for sale and purchase could be restored. Thus, if a registered dealer is allowed to pay that hidden part of composition tax through RCM, the registered dealer can become eligible to take input tax credit of the equivalent amount without disturbing the treatment given to the composition dealer as per the existing GST legislation.The composition dealer shall, however, have to be exempted from payment of composition tax on such turnover which he makes with the registered dealer paying tax on an RCM basis.For this purpose, changes shall have to be made in the statute as under:-i) Section 10 has made composition levy subject to section 9(3) and 9(4) of the central GST/state GST Act which allows RCM only to the specific categories on supply of goods or services or both. This further implies that the class of dealers do not fall within the scope of section 9(3) and 9(4) of the SGST/CGST Act. In case the mechanism has to be adopted, necessary amendment in the relevant section 9(3) needs to carried out so as to include class of dealers in the section.ii) If composition dealer is to be allowed to avail the option for being part of or remain out of the proposed scheme, necessary amendment needs to be carried out in section 9(3) of the SGST/CGST Act, since the section mandates that RCM cannot be optional. The relevant portion of the section which makes it mandatory in case of notified categories of goods and services is reproduced here as under:“Section 9 sub section 3 “The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify categories of supply of goods or services or both, the tax on which shall be paid on reverse charge basis by the recipient of such goods or services or both and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient as if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such goods or services or both”.iii) This facility has to be made available at the composition rate instead of the normal scheduled rates as envisaged under the GST legislation. For making it possible, the necessary provision has to be incorporated in section 9 (3), which enable the recipient of supply from a composition dealer to pay tax on that supply at the rate of composition.iv) Amendments in GSTR-4 and other corresponding rules have to be made to allow the composition dealers to reflect details of supply made to registered dealers on an RCM basis as discussed above.Once freed from resolving these issues, the short-term calibration of rates and pruning the list of commodities in the sin goods category, the long-term issue that the GST Council needs to deliberate on is the relevance of an MRP system—an anachronism from the control raj days— in a GST regime.The MRP system was relevant in a pre-liberalized economy operating with producer taxation. The producers would work out the costs and margins of its distribution chain and allocate that within the MRP.Now it is a consumption tax, with final payment of tax at the last stage. Here, it becomes an anomaly to have an MRP. It overdetermines the system. The result in the last three months has been that GST is being charged over and above the MRP!It is time to examine if it is right or even the mandate of the manufacturer to set the price at which a product will be sold to the end user. For in doing so he decides the profit margin of the retailer, which in the current system may end up harming the consumer. Under GST, the MRP is more likely than not to create a retail price collusion as it becomes the de facto uniform price.
Hindustan Unilever also said it has communicated to trade asking them to pass on the benefits to consumers. Photo: BloombergNew Delhi: Anti-profiteering investigator Directorate General of Safeguards (DGS) has a sent a notice to consumer goods maker Hindustan Unilever Ltd for alleged profiteering under the goods and service tax (GST) regime.DGS has previously launched investigation into five other businesses for allegedly not passing on the benefit of tax reduction to consumers in the new indirect tax regime that kicked in from 1 July.An HUL spokesperson confirmed receiving the DGS notice and said the company was fully committed towards ensuring that all benefits arising from reduction in GST rates are fully passed on to the consumers.“We have received a notice on 16 January from DG safeguards and we are in the process of ascertaining the full details. We will respond to the same stating our position,” said the spokesperson.HUL also said it has communicated to trade asking them to pass on the benefits to consumers.“We have accelerated our networks covering more than 800 stock-keeping units (SKUs) to reduce prices and increase grammage in case of price point packs and most of these have already landed in the market. List of key SKUs with lower prices and increased grammages is available on our website. In addition, HUL has also been communicating the price reductions or increased grammages through advertisements in more than 10 languages,” said the spokesperson.Concerns of profiteering is a worry for policy makers who are keen to see that the tax reform benefits the common man. However, officials admit that the legal provisions in GST laws dealing with profiteering are not foolproof as there is nothing that prevents producers from raising the price in a free market economy, claiming higher input costs. The drive against profiteering is set to test the robustness of the law. Experts argue that regulatory action against profiteering is more in the nature of price regulation than of taxation.“Unless the concerned commodity is one that is statutorily subject to price regulation by way of maximum price ceiling, it would not be possible to effectively use the current mechanism to ensure that benefit of reduced tax is passed on to the end customer,” said Manoj S.R., a New Delhi-based lawyer.“Anti-profiteering is not a foolproof law. However, the actions of companies have to be benchmarked against reasonableness. Competition in the market will ensure to a great extent that the tax benefits are passed on to consumers,” said a tax official, who asked not to be named.Hardcastle Restaurants Pvt. Ltd, which runs McDonald’s restaurants in west and south India, department store chain Lifestyle International Pvt. Ltd and a Jaipur-based trading company are among the firms issued notices under the anti-profiteering provision so far, Mint reported on 30 December.If the Directorate General of Safeguards finds a business guilty of profiteering, the NAA can order it to reduce prices or return to the buyer an amount equal to the tax not passed on. A profiteering business will have to pay 18% interest on the tax reduction not passed on to consumers. It can also attract a penalty and could cost a business its registration.