Rural demand is seen growing in 2018 as impact of demonetisation, GST wears off. Photo: Pradeep Gaur/MintMumbai: Hopes of an earnings revival for fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) firms are pinned on rural demand recovering after two tough years, even though macro indicators suggest continuing distress in the countryside.Equities brokerages tracking FMCG firms say that with the effects of demonetisation and goods and services tax (GST) behind, and measures likely in the coming budget to boost rural spending, rural incomes could see a recovery, along with rising demand for consumer staples.ICICI Securities expects the FMCG companies that it tracks to report an aggregate revenue growth of 14.8% in the December quarter from a year earlier, faster than the 5.2% recorded in the preceding quarter, analyst Anand Mour said in a 9 January note. “We believe the acceleration in revenue growth rate is largely attributable to a pick-up in consumer sentiment, gradual demand pick up in rural areas and also due to a lower base.”Kotak Institutional Equities said that while consumer firms will post “anywhere between solid and spectacular” performance for the December 2017 quarter, this may largely be due to the base effect of the December 2016 quarter, where demonetization led to a reduction in revenues and volumes for most FMCG firms.“If we had a choice, we would have preferred to not build/publish estimates for 3QFY18E, given the high margin of error induced by—(1) demonetization impact in the base quarter, (2) GST-related accounting changes, and (3) uncertainty on the degree of wholesale channel repair post GST,” Rohit Chordia, executive director and lead analyst (consumer) at Kotak, said in a note dated 4 January, adding that the coming quarterly earnings will not be comparable year on year.For Hindustan Unilever Ltd, Kotak Institutional Equities estimated two-year compound annual growth rate in underlying volume growth to be around 3% for the December quarter.Brokerages say rural demand in 2018 will be spurred by recovery in rural trade channels (particularly wholesale) after reeling under the twin disruptions of demonetization in November 2016 and the GST implemented in July last year. Meanwhile, they say, the government is likely to introduce measures to increase spending on rural infrastructure and farmers’ wages during the upcoming budget, the last before the 2019 general election, said brokerage firm CLSA in a note dated 4 January.However, most macro indicators of the rural economy paint a dismal picture of jobs, wages and consumption.Area under wheat cultivation fell 5% year-on-year between October 2017 and January 2018, as did area under oilseeds, as per data from the government, Mint reported on 9 January.Meanwhile, both farm and non-farm wages are at 10-year low growth rates, data from the RBI compiled by brokerage firm HDFC Securities shows. Both are growing at a CAGR of 6% as compared to 7-19% during 2004-2014, the data shows.“Non-agriculture wage growth rate has declined faster than agriculture wage growth during NDA government’s regime, reflecting labour-intensive sectors like infrastructure and real estate under stress,” HDFC Securities said in a note dated 27 December.This indicates a deep distress among rural consumers that may not recover immediately enough to reflect in the earnings of FMCG firms.“Given where we are at the current economic situation, it is quite likely that there would be rural recovery if the appropriate set of reforms is introduced by the government. However, the recovery will be gradual and not in say one year,” Anil Talreja, Partner, Deloitte India, said. “The cascading effect of reforms always takes time to reach the rural areas.”But the upcoming Budget may see key policy reforms that will at least jumpstart this growth, he said.“The finance minister has himself indicated that there is going to be a special focus on the rural sector as well as infrastructure in the upcoming Budget. A few areas that we can expect here – providing state of the art infrastructure to rural areas, warehousing facility, cold-storage for farmers and artisans to realise maximum potential from their produce,” Talreja said, adding that the government should focus on direct benefits to the rural economy such as improving physical infrastructure and internet connectivity.
A key reason for higher truck sales could be the low base of the year-ago period that was severely impacted by the currency ban that hit economic activity Graphic by Naveen Kumar Saini/MintTruck rentals and sales, which are indicators of economic activity, have sent contradictory and confusing signals in the last few months. On the one hand, truck rentals have been trending down after the festive season, reflecting weak demand for freight. On the other hand, truck sales have been skyrocketing, beating all other auto segments, which shows the economy is doing well. Which view is the correct one?December rentals fell by 3-4% from the previous month. Surprisingly, this is in spite of a hike in domestic diesel price that followed higher international crude oil prices. Clearly, the movement of goods fell after the festive season and lower demand for trucks from the small and medium enterprise segment.The Indian Foundation of Transport Research and Training said that a full round-trip period has increased by about 25% as trucks have to wait for two-four days for getting a return load. This is true of medium and long distance transport, indicating sluggish demand compared to capacity of trucks.Further, rentals have been erratic in the earlier months due to macroeconomic disruptions like the goods and services tax (GST).Why then are truck sales rising? December quarter sales for two leading truck manufacturers—Ashok Leyland Ltd and Tata Motors Ltd—that account for about two-thirds of the total domestic sales, jumped by roughly 40% year-on-year, with others not far behind in growth rates. The two companies’ sales grew by 42% and 29%, respectively, for the December quarter too.A key reason could be the low base of the year-ago period that was severely impacted by the currency ban that hit economic activity. Truck sales during the December 2016 quarter, therefore, were low.Thereafter, the need to comply with the new emission norms forced a gradual buying of trucks by fleet operators. Dovetailing with this is the stricter enforcement of overloading rules. More relevant to explain high December quarter sales are the heavy discounts offered by the manufacturers to push inventory before the new regulation for commercial vehicles sold after 1 January 2018 to have truck driver cabins with air conditioners or blowers in some categories . Besides, dealers say that the game to garner higher market share also saw higher discounts during the quarter.That said, one cannot rule out the contribution of a pickup in infrastructure activity that has led to demand for higher tonnage trucks and multi-axle carriers.The Street is more optimistic too. According to Bharat Gianani, an analyst at Sharekhan Ltd, “Business cycles are getting normalized after the initial GST related glitches. Further, with introduction of GST, the run time for trucks has increased (several states have dismantled check points after GST) which has led to less stopovers and better profitability for truck operators. Another trend gaining traction is optimising warehousing facilities due to unified GST that may fuel demand for high tonnage trucks.”But that doesn’t explain the declining rentals. Clearly, we must take the notion that rising truck sales reflect a stronger economy, with a dose of salt.Finally, higher budgetary sops for infrastructure and rural growth along with lower interest rates on truck finance could support truck sales even if rentals continue to be erratic in the near term.
The risk of the government breaching its fiscal deficit target of 3.2% of GDP in FY18 increased significantly as it exhausted 112% of its Rs5.5 trillion full-year fiscal deficit by November-end. Graphic: MintNew Delhi/Mumbai: Moving to limit the fiscal slippage in 2017-18 ahead of the 1 February budget presentation, the finance ministry on Wednesday pared its additional borrowing requirement before 31 March to Rs20,000 crore from Rs50,000 crore.Bond prices rose, stock indices surged to lifetime highs and the rupee gained as the markets cheered the announcement.“Government has reassessed additional borrowing requirements taking note of revenue receipts and expenditure pattern. Requirement of additional borrowing being reduced from Rs50,000 crore as notified earlier to Rs20,000 crore,” economic affairs secretary Subhash Chandra Garg wrote in a Twitter post.The risk of the government breaching its fiscal deficit target of 3.2% of gross domestic product (GDP) in the fiscal year ending March increased significantly after it exceeded its Rs5.5 trillion full-year borrowing target by November-end because of lower-than-expected revenue collections and higher expenditure.Government revenues have been under pressure due to a shortfall in indirect tax collections under the goods and services tax (GST) regime, prompting it to announce additional borrowing of Rs50,000 crore in December to fund spending in key sectors of the economy.Suspected tax evasion and a cut in tax rates on many items have seen GST collections fall progressively since the tax was implemented on 1 July. In December, GST revenue (for the month of November) came in at Rs80,808 crore, falling from Rs94,063 crore collected in August.Data released by the finance ministry on Wednesday showed that direct tax collections grew by 18.7% this fiscal year up to 15 January, representing 70.3% of the full-year budget estimate, providing a breather to the government.“Government did not accept borrowings of Rs15,000 crore in last three auctions. Remaining Rs15,000 crore would be reduced from the notified borrowing programme of ensuing weeks,” the finance ministry said in a statement.In the budget, the government had pegged its aggregate gross market borrowing at Rs5.85 trillion. With Wednesday’s revision, the number now stands at Rs6 trillion.The reduction in borrowing will result in lower supply of securities and provide some relief to the bond market, where yields had risen because of worries over fiscal slippage.The yield on 10-year bonds fell 16.6 basis points, its steepest fall since 15 November 2016, to close at 7.222% compared with its previous day close of 7.269%. Bond yields and prices move in opposite directions.“The government has finally settled on the additional borrowing number that was originally expected in December by the market, and hence the sense of relief. Now that this confusion is behind us, I think bond yields will remain steady till the budget,” said Ananth Narayan, who teaches at S.P. Jain Institute of Management and Research, Mumbai.On 15 December, RBI deputy governor Viral Acharya said banks must manage interest rate risks on their own and not rely on regulatory forbearance. This added to the woes of bond market participants, especially banks which had hoped for some regulatory leeway to contain losses in their bond portfolios.
Hindustan Unilever CEO Sanjiv Mehta says since GST and demonetisation disrupted the pipeline, the firm will have to wait another quarter or two for a trend to emerge. Photo: S. Kumar/MintMumbai: Hindustan Unilever Ltd (HUL) on Wednesday reported strong quarterly sales and profit growth, signalling that consumer demand is recovering.HUL’s net profit rose 28% in the three months ended December to Rs1,326 crore, beating the Rs1,156 crore profit estimate of analysts surveyed by Bloomberg.Reported net sales rose 2.5% to Rs8,323 crore. On a comparable basis (after accounting for the effects of the goods and services tax, or GST, implemented from 1 July), revenues at the country’s largest packaged consumer goods maker grew 17% from a year ago. In the home care segment, its second largest business by revenue, comparable growth topped at 20%.“Trade conditions are normalizing,” said chief financial officer Srinivas Phatak. “We had said in September that after initial turbulence (from GST), the trade had started to improve. In December (quarter), I think it has improved. There is a gradual improvement in demand and it is coming through all our categories.”HUL reported volume growth of 11%. However, that comes on top of a 4% decline in the December 2016 quarter as the invalidation of high-value notes hit consumer spending. Still, adjusting for the note ban and the effects of GST, the numbers indicate a demand recovery, said analysts.“These results were not spectacular but they were ahead of expectations because 5% growth in volume for HUL is very good given the large base they are coming from,” said Sachin Bobade, senior equities analyst at brokerage firm Dolat Capital.Growth was broad-based across segments. On a like-to-like basis, home care sales grew 20% and personal care by 17%. Refreshment and foods sales also grew by 13% and 18%, respectively.HUL’s management was cautiously optimistic about demand growth.“You had demonetisation, then pipeline changes, then you had GST. It is very difficult to decipher a trend when the markets have been so turbulent. You will have to wait another quarter or two for a trend,” said Sanjiv Mehta, chief executive officer. “The trade has been stabilizing, there have been relatively better monsoons compared to financial year 2015-16, and with the government’s thrust of putting more money in the hands of farmers, I believe it should augur well, but let us see how it goes in the future.”In a presentation to investors uploaded on its website, the company said that it expected the “gradual improvement in demand to sustain” and warned about “further inflation in input costs”.HUL’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (Ebitda) grew 24% to Rs1,680 crore. Operating margin widened by 1.1 percentage points.The company’s management said that rural growth recovery was stronger, but this was primarily because it was affected worse than urban sales during the note ban period. The company declined to share growth rates for rural markets but said that recovery is happening in both urban and rural markets.HUL also made a one-time provision of Rs119 crore to be paid to the government because it could not immediately pass on the benefit of lower GST rates for some categories announced on 15 November.“Actions were initiated immediately, but it takes time. We always have pipeline stocks,” said Phatak. The company offered the total Rs119 crore to the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC), suggesting that it be deposited in a consumer welfare fund, said Mehta. But since the government doesn’t have such a fund, HUL is awaiting instructions on how to pass it on to the government, he said.Shares of HUL fell 0.68% to Rs1,371.85 on the BSE, while the exchange’s benchmark Sensex rose to an all-time high of 35,081.82 points, gaining 0.89% on Wednesday. Results were announced after the markets closed.
The GST Council meeting on Thursday comes just days ahead of Budget 2018. Photo: PTINew Delhi: The GST Council will on Thursday consider a host of proposals to simplify procedure for filing of returns, registration of large entities and take stock of the GSTN’s readiness for e-way bill rollout from 1 February.The GST Council, in its meeting ahead of Budget 2018, will also consider reduction in GST rates for goods and services in view of the representations received from various interest groups.This would be the 25th meeting of the Council. Chaired by Union finance minister and comprising his state counterparts, the Council will give its nod for GST law amendments which could be taken up for consideration and passage in the Budget session starting 29 January, sources said.The law review committee which was set up by the government has suggested centralised registration for large service providers with annual turnover of over Rs500 crore and operating in 10 or more states.The committee has made as many as 16 recommendations based on the suggestions of the advisory panel comprising trade and industry.Among other things, the Council will review the preparedness of GST Network (GSTN) in handling the return filing process as well as for implementing the e-way bill system with effect from 1 February.Under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) rolled out from July last year, inter-state road transport of goods beyond 10 km, with a value of Rs50,000 and above, will mandatorily require e-way bill from 1 February.GSTN has launched an initial trial run for e-way bill mechanism in which 10 states have joined. Others are expected to follow suit.With regard to returns, several industry bodies have represented to the government to simplify the procedure for filing of GST returns. They have also suggested that the government should reduce the frequency of filing GST returns, especially for small businesses.Following the representations by the industry, the Council had in November 2017 set up a committee under GSTN Chairman Ajay Bhushan Pandey to suggest steps for easing compliance burden on traders.Deloitte India Senior Director M S Mani said there has been a reduction of 10% in the number returns filed compared to the initial months.“This is a worrying trend. While some reduction in compliance in recent months can been attributed to the technology challenges faced by taxpayers and some amount of uncertainty due to the multiple extensions in the return filing timelines, arresting the trend of declining returns needs significant attention,” Mani said.