Other consumer goods firms plan to make similar provisions as they were unable to cut prices immediately after GST rollout, say tax experts. Photo: Ramesh Pathania/MintMumbai: Hindustan Unilever Ltd’s decision to set aside money to compensate consumers for excess tax charged by it has set a precedent for other companies.India’s largest packaged consumer goods maker earmarked Rs119 crore in the December quarter to be paid to the government because it could not immediately lower prices after the goods and services tax (GST) on several products was reduced on 15 November.The company has offered to release the money to the Consumer Welfare Fund, run by the department of consumer affairs.HUL received a notice for alleged profiteering this week, PTI reported on Tuesday. The government has set up an anti-profiteering authority to ensure that tax cuts are passed on to consumers and the benefits are not quietly pocketed by companies.Other large companies are now considering making similar provisions as HUL because they were unable to cut prices immediately following the GST reductions, tax experts say.“What HUL made as a provision is more from an audit perspective to make sure they do not show this money as profit but as payment to be made to the government,” said Anita Rastogi, partner at auditor PwC India.Under GST rules, the central government notified in June last year that any excess profit a manufacturer makes by charging a higher price should be credited to the Consumer Welfare Fund. But there is little clarity on how this transfer should happen and under what circumstances.“If money is collected (by a company as profit) without passing on the tax benefits, then it will go to the consumer, and if not possible, then the Consumer Welfare Fund,” Sachin Menon, partner and head, indirect tax, at auditor KPMG, said in an interview. “However, guidelines governing this are yet to be issued.”Hardcastle Restaurants Pvt. Ltd, which runs McDonald’s restaurants in west and south India, department store chain Lifestyle International Pvt. Ltd and a Jaipur-based trading company are among firms issued notices under the anti-profiteering provision so far, Mint reported on 30 December.“Actions were initiated immediately but it takes time,” Srinivas Phatak, chief financial officer at HUL, said on Wednesday at a briefing on the company’s December quarter earnings. “There are always pipeline stocks. We advised modern trade retailers to pass on the rate reductions, and these were passed very quickly. Our distributors reached out to more than a million retailers, asking them to pass on the benefits.”HUL is now waiting for instructions from the government on what to do with the money it has set aside.Given the ambiguity in anti-profiteering definitions and rules, HUL said it decided to be proactive and voluntarily declared to the Central Board of Excise and Customs that it estimated Rs119 crore worth of benefits should have gone to its consumers. Other companies may do the same.“HUL has said that it was not able to pass on all benefits immediately, so other companies would have faced the same issue,” Rastogi said.Most large packaged consumer goods makers, and other companies as well “have started to hold board meetings to figure out how to deal with this situation before the DGS (Directorate General of Safeguards) issues them a notice”, she said.This could mark the beginning of a large influx of money in the Consumer Welfare Fund that was set up in 1992 to create consumer law chairs at universities, set up Grahak Suvidha Kendras, run projects for consumer awareness, and contribute to state governments’ consumer welfare funds.According to the latest annual report of the department of consumer affairs, the government provisioned Rs15.50 crore for the fund in FY2016-17 and Rs6.01 crore had been used until 31 December 2016.
According to the Global Burden of Disease report, 2015, India ranked a poor 154 out of 195 countries in terms of access to healthcare. Photo: Mint11%What is it? The percentage amount by which the Indian government is reportedly planning to increase its public health spending to $8.2 billion in the upcoming annual budget for 2018-19.Why is it important? This is lower than the $10 billion health budget sought by health minister J.P. Nadda in a November letter to the finance minister, which would have amounted to a 33% increase in allocation over 2017-18. This raises questions if India would be able to meet its target of increasing its annual health spending to 2.5% of its GDP (gross domestic product) from the current 1.15%. Among 15 countries, India is the second last in terms of expenditure as a share of total government spending (5%) compared to China’s 10.4%.Tell me more: According to the Global Burden of Disease report, 2015, India ranked a poor 154 out of 195 countries in terms of access to healthcare.5,000 kmWhat is it? The range of Agni-V, an intercontinental surface-to-surface ballistic missile that India successfully tested on Thursday.Why is it important? The latest test of this missile, which has been tested five times since 2012, may have been incremental from a technological perspective but it comes amid India’s strained geopolitical relations with both China and Pakistan. India’s age-old dispute over the Himalayan region of Doklam with Beijing has flared up recently while Pakistan, whose relations with India seems to be worsening with increasing ceasefire violations across the Line of Control and the International Border in Jammu and Kashmir, is building up its nuclear capabilities.Tell me more: Agni-V was test-fired on Thursday morning from Abdul Kalam Island, off the coast of Odisha, and covered a distance of 4,900 km in 19 minutes.29What is it? The number of items for which the GST (goods and services tax) Council, headed by finance minister Arun Jaitley, reduced the tax rate on Thursday, in addition to 53 categories of services, effective 25 January.Why is it important? Besides these rate changes, the GST Council also recommended a few policy changes, including modifications to e-way bill rules and late fee payable by registered people to furnish forms GSTR-1, GSTR-5, GSTR-5A and GSTR-6. Transporters will be required to carry an e-way bill when moving goods worth over Rs50,000 between states, to check tax evasion, from 1 February. Armed with details of goods over Rs50,000, the government would be able to spot a mismatch if either the supplier or the buyer does not file returns.Tell me more: In its next meeting, the Council would consider bringing items such as crude oil, natural gas, petrol, diesel and real estate under GST.20What is it? The number of A380 “superjumbo” aircraft that Emirates has placed an order for with Airbus, with an option to buy 16 more.Why is it important? The latest order will bump up the A380 order book, which stood at 222 on 31 December 2017. Post this order, Emirates has ordered 178 A380s, which illustrates the importance of the Dubai-based carrier to the struggling A380 programme. Earlier this week, in an unusual statement, Airbus chief operating officer John Leahy said the France-based aircraft manufacturer would have to terminate the A380 programme unless Emirates ordered more aircraft.Tell me more: The A380 aircraft is the most expensive plane in the Airbus portfolio, with a list price of $445.6 million. When Airbus introduced it in 2005, it expected to sell about 1,200 planes; it has so far delivered 222.2What is it? The number of awards that Indian batsman and skipper Virat Kohli won at the ICC awards for 2017.Why is it important? Kohli was the men’s cricketer of the year and the ODI (one-day international) cricketer of the year. This haul underscores the phenomenal year that Kohli had: between 21 September 2016 and 31 December 2017, the qualification period for the awards, Kohli amassed 4,320 runs across the three formats.Tell me more: Steve Smith was named the test cricketer of the year. Kohli was named the captain of both the test and ODI teams of the year, both of which featured three Indians each.howindialives.com is a search engine for public data
Kerala finance minister Thomas Isaac said he like Nandan Nilekani’s clear and simple presentation. His only doubt is, why couldn’t the government talk and bring in him (Nilekani) since the beginning?Bengaluru: Nandan Nilekani seems to have dazzled the Goods and Services Tax (GST) Council members across ideologies.After his presentation on a simpler way to file tax returns in the Council meeting on Thursday, even Kerala finance minister Thomas Isaac, who is usually at loggerheads with the center in the Council, was all praises for Nilekani.“Honestly, I like Nandan Nilekani. Clear and simple presentation. My only doubt is, why couldn’t the government talk and bring in this chap since the beginning?” Isaac posted on Facebook, in Malayalam, later in the night after the meeting.Mint reported on Thursday that Nilekani proposed to simplify the current process of complex return filing operations. Though a final decision is yet to be taken on the revamp of the return filing process, the GST Council is thinking of doing away with forms such as GSTR-2, dealing with purchases, and GSTR-3, a comprehensive return, the report said.Instead, the existing simpler summary return form GSTR-3B will continue, which will be supplemented with details from invoices to be uploaded by suppliers on the GST Network (GSTN). This will enable invoice matching and check tax evasion.“Nilekani’s solution is a remarkably simple,” Isaac wrote, “Nobody has to file returns (as they are doing now). Instead every trader can send his sales invoice daily or weekly. Only if he upload and show the sales the one who bought from him will get the input credit. If he doesn’t upload, nobody will buy from him, since they won’t be getting any input credit from the purchase. In this manner, the computer itself will generate the return looking at the sales and purchase figures.”“I support Nilekani’s idea, but have asked for a week’s time to think since this will involve everything we have been saying and doing so far,” he said.“Only traders with more than Rs1.5 crore turnover has to file detailed returns currently. Kerala would have such 40,000 people. Almost half of them are using computer bills. For the rest, the government could give interest-free loans for computerization. It’ll make tax collection easier and curb leakage significantly,” added Isaac.However, Isaac didn’t hide his displeasure with the center for coming up with the idea to make simpler the returns filing process, the foundation behind tax collection at states, only seven months after the GST rollout. “The returns are shrinking (affecting the state finance)... last month not even 60% filed returns,” he said.
Disruptions from GST and a ban on high currency notes in November 2016 curtailed growth and manufacturing, services and consumer spending. Photo: ReutersBengaluru: India’s economy won’t significantly benefit from a goods and services tax until after next fiscal year, according to a slim majority of economists polled by Reuters, but almost half said rewards might come sooner.Economic growth is probably at its weakest pace this fiscal year since before a new calculation methodology was introduced in 2014-15, the 10-18 January poll of about 30 economists found.Disruptions from the goods and services tax (GST) and a ban on high currency notes in November 2016 curtailed growth and manufacturing, services and consumer spending. Consequently, 15 of 28 economists said benefits from the tax wouldn’t be felt until at least the fiscal year starting April 2019.But signs of a recovery in activity are appearing, and 13 of the 28 said benefits may show up next year.The poll also forecast the economy would grow 6.6% this fiscal year and 7.3% next year.“Disruptions from the GST and demonetization are expected to start receding from Q2018 (April-June quarter) and a pick-up in consumption, investment and growth shall commence,” said K.K. Mital, investment advisor at Venus India.The latest consensus was lower than the forecast three months ago.An early realisation of the benefits would bring some relief to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which will need to deal with higher inflation over the coming years, the poll showed.After averaging 3.7% this fiscal year, consumer price inflation is now expected to exceed the RBI’s medium-term target of 4% each quarter through mid-2019, the end of the forecast horizon. It is expected to average 4.6% next year.“Upside risks (to inflation) stem from higher oil and food prices, currency depreciation, an accelerating economy and fiscal slippage,” said Arjen van Dijkhuizen, senior economist at ABN AMRO.Even so, the RBI is forecast to leave interest rates unchanged until at least the middle of next year. At its last meeting in December, the central bank said inflation risks were “evenly balanced”.However, high growth and inflation numbers might prompt a change in the RBI’s neutral policy stance. The consensus forecast among 24 economists was that an inflation level of 5.5 percent would prompt the central bank to consider raising rates.“As long as various gauges of underlying inflation track sub-5 percent, the RBI should stay pat,” said Abhishek Upadhyay, economist at ICICI Securities PD. “A worsening of other macro stability indicators on account of higher crude prices can make the RBI cautious.” Reuters
The Sensex recorded a significant rise of 919.19 points, or 2.65% while the Nifty gained 213.45 points, or 1.99%, in the week. Photo: APMumbai: Benchmark indices BSE Sensex and Nifty 50 extended their record-breaking streak for the third straight session Friday as healthy earnings by bluechip companies and GST rate cut gave fresh impetus to the buying momentum.BSE Sensex rose 251.29 points to end at a fresh lifetime high of 35,511.58, while the broader Nifty 50 advanced 77.70 points to record 10,894.70. Intraday, it breached the 10,900-mark for the first time.Investor sentiment got a leg-up after the GST Council on cut the tax rate on 29 goods and 54 categories of services. Encouraging December quarter results by bluechip firms like HDFC Bank Ltd and ITC Ltd added to the cheer.Opening higher on Friday, the 30-share Sensex surged to an all-time high of 35,542.17 on a string of encouraging earnings. It finally ended 251.29 points, or 0.71% higher at 35,511.58—bettering its previous record closing of 35,260.29 hit Thursday. The index has now rallied 740.53 points in three straight sessions.The 50-share NSE Nifty settled higher by 77.70 points, or 0.72%, at 10,894.70. The index surpassed its previous lifetime closing high of 10,817 recorded in Thursday’s session. Intraday, it touched an all-time high of 10,906.85.This was the seventh week of gains in a row for the markets. The Sensex recorded a significant rise of 919.19 points, or 2.65% while the Nifty gained 213.45 points, or 1.99%, in the week.“The government’s decision to cut GST rates for few more items and a good start to earnings season added energy in the market. Market is anticipating a sea change in the earnings with a growth of 15-20% in PAT (profit after tax) led by revamp in businesses and low base effect. Moreover, positive trend in global market and drop in crude prices influenced buying pattern,” said Vinod Nair, head of research, Geojit Financial Services.Foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) have been supporting the ongoing record run by infusing sizeable capital. They bought shares worth Rs1,894.99 crore while domestic institutional investors (DIIs) sold equities worth Rs657.46 crore on Thursday, according to provisional data from the stock exchanges.On the sectoral front, bankex jumped 1.52%, followed by realty (1.26%), infrastructure (1.19%), PSU (1.06), capital goods (0.92%), metal (0.91%) oil and gas (0.87%), power (0.46%), healthcare (0.43%), FMCG (0.42%), IT (0.36%) and auto (0.15%).In the Sensex space, Adani Ports and SEZ Ltd took the pole position by surging 4.68% in reaction to strong Q3 results, followed by Yes Bank Ltd at 2.37%. The private sector lender yesterday reported 22% rise in net profit at Rs1,076.87 crore for the third quarter ended 31 December 2017.HDFC Bank Ltd too gained 1% after it reported a 20.1% growth in net profit to Rs4,642.6 crore for the third quarter of the current fiscal. ITC Ltd rose 0.37% after the company on Friday reported a 16.75% rise in its net profit at Rs3,090.20 crore for the December quarter. Reliance Industries Ltd gained 1.09% ahead of its earnings.ICICI Bank Ltd, State Bank of India, Tata Consultancy Services Ltd (TCS), Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd, Axis Bank Ltd, Larsen and Toubro Ltd (L&T), Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd, Dr Reddy’s Laboratories Ltd, Bajaj Auto Ltd, Wipro Ltd, Bharti Airtel Ltd, Coal India Ltd, Hindustan Unilever Ltd and Asian Paints recorded gains of up to 2.15%.In the broader markets too, investors were busy creating fresh positions, lifting the small cap index by 0.88% and mid-cap by 0.77%.In Asian markets, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng ended 0.41% higher, while Japan’s Nikkei gained 0.19%. Shanghai Composite Index rose 0.38%. In Europe, Frankfurt’s DAX rose 0.87%, while Paris CAC 40 was up 0.45% in their early deals. London’s FTSE too rose 0.11%.