The 10-year bond yield was at 7.253% compared to its previous close of 7.264%. Photo: MintMumbai: The Indian rupee strengthened to one-week high against the US dollar on Tuesday as local equity markets continued to hit fresh record highs.The home currency closed at 63.74 a dollar, up 0.14% from its Monday’s close of 63.87. The rupee opened at 63.90 a dollar and touched a high and a low of 63.75 and 63.91 respectively.Analysts believe that the rally in the market is likely to continue after Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday indicated that the upcoming budget will not be a populist one.Modi on Sunday said in an interview with Times Now that it was “a myth” that people wanted sops and freebies. It is the responsibility of the government to understand the needs and aspirations of the people and work towards achieving them honestly, Modi said.The benchmark Sensex rose 0.96%, or 341.97 points, to 36,139.98. So far this year, it has gained 6.12%.India is projected to grow at 7.4% of its gross domestic product (GDP) in 2018 as against China’s 6.8%, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) said Monday, making it the fastest growing economy among emerging economies following last year’s slowdown due to demonetisation and the implementation of goods and services tax (GST), Mint reportedIn its latest World Economic Outlook update released on Monday ahead of the World Economic Forum in Davos, the IMF projected India’s GDP growth rate at 7.4% in 2018 and 7.8% in 2019.The 10-year bond yield ended at 7.253% compared to its previous close of 7.264%. Bond yields and prices move in opposite directions.Traders are cautious ahead of the last full-year Union budget on 1 February before the 2019 elections and Reserve Bank of India’s bi-monthly policy on 7 February.So far this year, the rupee has risen marginally 0.04%, while foreign investors bought $822.50 million and $471.90 million in equities and bonds, respectively.Asian currencies were trading higher. Japanese yen was up 0.27%, Indonesian rupiah 0.27%, Taiwan dollar 0.17%, Malaysian ringgit 0.17%, Singapore dollar 0.08%, Thai baht 0.08%, Singapore dollar 0.08% and China offshore rose 0.05%. However, Philippines peso was down 0.38%.The dollar index, which measures the US currency’s strength against major currencies, was trading at 90.389, down 0.01% from its previous close of 90.401.
The market encourages suppliers who are GST-compliant. Photo: MintThe goods and services tax (GST) is a fundamental revolution in the way we think about indirect taxes. It has created a single market, helping move goods seamlessly across states. The GST system has enrolled close to 10 million businesses onto a single national technology backbone, the GSTN (GST Network), and already collected over Rs3 lakh crore in taxes in less than six months. GST was welcomed because it aimed to create an incentive for compliance, rather than punish non-compliance.The basic driver of GST is the input tax credit (ITC). The tax paid by your suppliers should be subtracted from the tax you pay to the government. ITC is not a small deal. Without ITC, the tax you have paid becomes a cost. This tax can often be higher than the profit margin of the business. The market encourages suppliers who are GST-compliant. In fact, the threat of not being able to claim ITC is what drives compliance for most businesses, as it can have a major impact on cash flow and profits.How do you design a system where a buyer can take credit for tax paid by the supplier? It was agreed that the best way was to get the buyer to “accept” the invoice of the seller by matching it with his own purchase record. In practice, however, this was implemented through a complex model which involved the taxpayer filing three returns a month, and data going back and forth. Moreover, the returns were designed for tax purposes and did not reflect the way a business operates. The filings had to be matched often a month after they were raised, within a short 5-day window, which stressed every business.In addition, because of the worry that suppliers would not be uploading their invoices in time, buyers were allowed to take “provisional credit” for invoices yet to come. This created more complexities—mismatches, ITC reversal with interest, and reclaim of ITC. Finally the buyer was made liable by law, for the non-payment of tax by the supplier! This system was held in abeyance within a few months of the GST roll out, and the search began for a simplified system.An alternative was to emulate state VAT (value-added tax). In VAT, a business uploads both sales invoices and purchase bills. Then the central system uses automatic matching. This sounds deceptively simple, but in reality there can be mismatches of up to 40%. So, any business could get a few dozen mismatched invoices, across 10 or more suppliers every month to manually correct—rapidly degenerating into a vicious cycle of trying to match “stale” records. Because of the high error rate, you would not be able to implement automatic ITC reversal without being unfair to businesses. Without automatic ITC reversal, the data quality would remain poor, as there would be little motivation to upload correct invoices and claims. The GST system would be unable to dig itself out of this hole.Is there a better, more business friendly way of implementing the original idea of buyers “accepting” the invoice from the seller?We know that every buyer, big or small, whether or not they run on an automated accounting system, do verify their supplier’s invoices before releasing payments. No one pays a supplier whatever they ask for! Filing taxes should not be orthogonal to business; it should be a seamless part of the regular business flow. So how do we do this?Basically, the guiding principle is that ITC should only be provided on matched invoices. To do this, first, the format in which the seller uploads invoices to the GSTN system should be what businesses are used to. Business should be able to continuously upload their invoices at a line-item level at a frequency of their choosing, hourly, daily, weekly, monthly—whatever works for them. The buyer in turn would be able to “accept” the invoice at a frequency and time of their choosing. Upload and acceptance of invoice should be enabled through multiple channels—web portal, mobile devices, spreadsheet based offline tools and direct integration of accounting packages to the portal.All invoices uploaded and accepted at the time of a designated monthly cut-off, would be eligible for ITC. Buyers will encourage sellers to upload invoices, and will themselves “accept” invoices quickly to get the ITC. Since now getting and saving money is contingent on good data, within a matter of months the data would be very clean. With this data the system can generate tax filings automatically!The complexity of provisional credit can also be abolished. If you do not find your invoice there, you should have a way to notify your suppliers if they have missed it. Moreover, buyers should not be held liable for the seller not paying his taxes. Whether the supplier has paid the tax is for the government to enforce, using big data and analytics.This will lead to happier taxpayers, an increase in tax revenue, and fulfil the vision of a Good and Simple Tax!Nandan Nilekani was the founding chairman of UIDAI and is currently the chairman of Infosys. When he was in Government, he was also one of the architects of the GST Network (GSTN). Infosys is responsible for building and managing the GSTN backbone. The company won the contract to build the GSTN technology platform in 2015, when Nilekani was neither with the Government nor with Infosys.
Sales in United Spirits’ prestige and above segment—which includes brands like McDowell’s No.1, Royal Challenge, Antiquity and Signature—declined 3% in the third quarter of 2017-18. Photo:Bengaluru: United Spirits Ltd’s standalone net profit declined 8.8% in the fiscal third quarter and revenue grew only marginally as the company’s business was hurt by distribution changes in a few states and one-time provisions.Profit at India’s largest liquor company fell to Rs134.7 crore in the quarter ended 31 December from Rs147.7 crore a year ago. Revenue increased to Rs7,160.9 crore from Rs7,077.8 crore, the Diageo Plc-controlled liquor maker reported in a filing with the BSE on Tuesday.“Our net sales performance was adversely impacted in this quarter by the expected route to market changes in certain states, and to a lesser extent, by the residual effects of the highway ban. Given this context, I am particularly pleased with our gross margin improvement, which has allowed us to significantly increase marketing investment by 27% and, thereby, invest in the future,” USL’s chief executive officer Anand Kripalu said in the statement.India’s Supreme Court banned liquor outlets within 500 metres of national and state highways in April.USL did not mention the states that changed their distribution process. But in the past, industry executives have said that Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh could possibly change the way they distribute alcohol and give governments more control over the process.This has been expected to pose a challenge for organized liquor firms as sometimes those managing state-run alcohol outlets are lowly-paid employees, and that could lead to issues of graft, according to industry executives.Sales in USL’s prestige and above segment—which includes brands like McDowell’s No.1, Royal Challenge, Antiquity and Signature and is its main focus area — declined 3% in the third quarter of 2017-18.Net sales in its popular or mass segment of brands such as Bagpiper, Director’s Special and Haywards whiskies declined 16%, hurt by the one-time impact of operating model changes. Last January, the company had decided to take the franchise route for some of its popular segment brands in some states.USL took a one-time charge of Rs13 crore for ‘supply footprint rationalization’ during the quarter, it said, without giving further details on what that entailed. However, in the notes accompanying its results, the company said it has incurred an impairment loss on property, plant and equipment in relation to certain manufacturing units.In its notes, the company also said it has not recognized interest income on a loan that United Breweries (Holdings) Ltd (UBHL) and its subsidiaries owe to it, amounting to Rs31.7 crore, in the quarter. It has offset payables to UBHL amounting to Rs9 crore for the quarter against the interest receivable.UBHL, the holding company from which embattled liquor baron Vijay Mallya used to run his business empire, had been asked to wind up by the Karnataka high court in February 2017.“Looking ahead, while the adverse impact of the highway ban is behind us, we do expect to see continued impact of route to market changes in certain states in this financial year. Importantly, we now expect that the adverse impact of GST will be more than offset by productivity savings and pricing,” Kripalu said.