Total revenue from the organized retail sector, across categories, is expected to catapult to $166 billion by FY25 from $55 billion in FY16, Edelweiss Securities said in a report. Photo: Priyanka Parashar/MintBangaluru/Mumbai: After a tough year by way of sales and margin growth, apparel retailers are hoping for a rebound in 2018 as consumer demand picks up.Still, with the modern, organized retail landscape shifting and adjusting to an omni-channel way of doing business, like-for-like sales growth could be under pressure. Omni-channel offers customers a combination of shopping online and at physical retail stores.While these retailers benefited significantly in the April-June quarter from pre-GST (goods and services tax) sales, they took a hit in July immediately after GST was implemented as consumers temporarily clamped down on spending. An early Diwali that nearly overlapped with end-of-season sales meant the recovery in the December quarter was also not as strong as expected.But things are looking better now.“The whole brick-and-mortar growth story is intact. This year at a company level, i.e. Lifestyle, Home Centre and Max Fashions, we will close with revenue of almost Rs8,000 crore. We are growing at a 20-23% five-year CAGR. We expect that CAGR rate to be at least 18-20% going ahead,” said Kabir Lumba, managing director of Lifestyle International Pvt. Ltd. CAGR stands for compound annual growth rate.Lifestyle has been posting double-digit, like-for-like sales growth for four consecutive years and there is no change in that broad trend, despite supply chain disruptions in July-August and a 10-15% lower-than-expected Diwali sale, according to Lumba.Like-for-like sales measure sales growth excluding any effects of expansion or acquisitions that artificially enlarge a company’s sales.Fast-fashion brand Splash is also positive that 2018 will be good, provided there are no more policy changes.“There are a lot more activities and interventions happening at malls, which is getting the customer to come back and experience brick-and-mortar,” said Abhinav Zutshi, Splash India’s chief operating officer.Total revenue from the organized retail sector, across categories, is expected to catapult to $166 billion by FY25 from $55 billion in FY16, Edelweiss Securities wrote in a research report on 8 January. Apparel, food and beverage and jewellery will benefit the most over the long-term from India’s growing shift to modern, organized retail, Edelweiss said.Within apparel, the industry is expected to continue to bet heavily on women’s wear. Indo-western women’s wear, in particular, will come of age, said Jitendranath Patri, vice president of marketing at Central, Future Lifestyle and Fashion Ltd’s department store chain.The main reason behind the optimism among analysts and industry executives is that underlying consumer demand remains strong. “Our channel checks suggest that consumer demand has not been impacted at all because of GST implementation,” analysts at PhillipCapital wrote in a report published on 5 January.Policies like the Maharashtra government’s December decision to allow shops and restaurants that don’t serve alcohol, cinema halls, salons and hyper malls to be open 24/7 will also boost brick-and-mortar retail and put it on equal footing with e-commerce.But some caution that margins could come under pressure as retailers adjust to an omni-channel business model, which requires additional expenditure and resources. For instance, some apparel retailers offer free home delivery service. While that may not work out to a huge amount on an individual order basis, collectively, it puts pressure on margins. And that is playing out against a backdrop of an ever-increasing number of brands entering the market.Consumers are also not changing their shopping habits as easily as they used to before despite a big push from retailers, according to Govind Shrikhande, managing director of Shoppers Stop Ltd.“Just because there are more players, suddenly customers will not double their demand. There are a lot more companies vying for that share of the wallet now, even as consumer demand is growing at a normal pace. Like-to-like growth will be under pressure because a bulk of the growth will be through new stores,” said Vasanth Kumar, executive director at Max Fashions.
The revised rates of duty drawback will help address the concerns of the export sectors and make India’s exports more competitive in the global economy, according to the finance ministry. Photo: HTNew Delhi: The finance ministry on Thursday increased duty drawback rates on 102 items to make Indian exports more competitive.The ministry, however, seems to have ignored the recommendations of a parliamentary standing committee on commerce to allow exporters to use the duty drawback scheme to take care of all the embedded taxes they have to pay under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime.Under the pre-GST regime, government used the duty drawback scheme to refund both excise and customs duties paid on inputs used for exports.However, after GST was introduced, the government reduced the duty drawback rates and allowed them to be used only for customs duty refunds on inputs used.The export items that will now enjoy a higher duty drawback include marine and seafood products, automobile tyres and bicycle tyres/tubes, leather and articles made of leather, yarn and fabric made of wool, glass handicrafts and bicycles.“As a step towards more efficient input tax neutralization on exports, after considering various representations from trade and industry, the government of India has enhanced the all industry rates of duty drawback for 102 tariff items. The revised rates of duty drawback will help address the concerns of these export sectors and make India’s exports more competitive in the global economy,” the finance ministry said in a statement.According to independent trade analyst T.N.C. Rajagopalan, to the extent that exporters get more benefits, the move by the finance ministry is a welcome step.“However, the problem regarding delay in refund of input tax credit faced by exporters remains,” he added.The parliamentary standing committee on commerce, in its report on “impact of GST on exports” released last month, said both direct and embedded tax refunds under the new GST system is very complicated for small exporters who do not have adequate back office capability.“The committee recommends that the government provide for a duty drawback rate which would encompass all the taxes including the GST/IGST levied as well as embedded/blocked tax and give a choice to the exporters to either claim the duty drawback or follow the input tax credit route. This will also release the pressure on GST Network,” it said.The committee said sudden withdrawal of the incentives extended earlier under the duty drawback scheme will lead to the collapse of labour-intensive industries and expressed deep concern over the possibility of job losses.“This will have a cascading effect on employment and livelihood of poor workers in these industries.”The committee said it was informed that trimming down of the duty drawback scheme and consequent erosion of export competitiveness had already set in the problem of layoffs.Bipin Sapra, tax partner at EY India, said the revision of drawback rates is a welcome relief to exporters and their cash flow, which had been adversely impacted because of delayed refunds and increased input cost in GST, should now improve.
iD Fresh Food also has a few product launches in store, including a vada batter that it counts as its biggest innovation so far.Bengaluru: iD Fresh Food India Pvt. Ltd is ramping up its manufacturing capacity, launching new products, and planning to experiment with frozen versions of its popular idly and dosa batter to enter new geographies, a top executive said.These strategies are expected to help iD achieve its goal of becoming a Rs1,000 crore company over the next 4-5 years, a plan that was temporarily affected by supply-chain disruptions after the goods and services tax (GST) was implemented. iD originally targeted a revenue of Rs230 crore in 2017-18 but now expects around Rs200 crore.“We’re running a bit short this year. We had a lot of issues. (But) next year we have an ambitious target of Rs350 crore,” said iD’s co-founder and chief executive P.C. Musthafa.The change in GST rate on idly and dosa batter from 12% to 5%, led to traders ceasing to stock these products, and this impacted business badly for three months, he added. Indeed, fast-moving consumer goods businesses were temporarily hit after GST as the change in prices—due to tax rate changes—meant traders and distributors refused to stock many of their products as they would find it difficult to sell the stock at old rates.Still, Musthafa is confident that the opportunities the company lost out on during those three months and the manufacturing capacity expansion should help.iD has six manufacturing facilities across Bengaluru, Chennai, Mumbai, Hyderabad and Dubai. It has started building three new plants, one each in Bengaluru, Mumbai and Dubai. It will close older plants in Mumbai and Dubai and consolidate all its south Indian plants into one large new plant in Bengaluru.The company’s current capacity is around 1.5 million idlis per day. After its new plants come into play over the coming months, its capacity will go up to 10 million idlis a day.“The ready-to-cook product market is on a steep rise in the top cities. Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Chennai etc have a large migrant population of professionals and are the largest market for these products. Once a good delivery model is set up, these products become household names and families become dependent on them for their daily meal,” said Sreedhar Prasad, partner at KPMG in India.iD also has a few product launches in store, including a vada batter that it counts as its biggest innovation so far. The vada batter—due to hit retail shelves shortly—will come in pouches that allow consumers to squeeze vadas directly into hot oil and eliminate the messy, time-consuming process of shaping them by hand.It plans to expand its super-foods portfolio, which currently consists of ragi batter, into oats, wheat and other millets. In February, it will introduce filter coffee decoction and in March-April it will re-launch its tomato and coconut chutneys.“We’re also contemplating launching our products in the frozen segment for markets outside our current coverage. Places like Ahmedabad, Surat where we are not planning to launch fresh batter immediately,” Musthafa said.The Bengaluru-based company, which estimates it has helped its consumers make 2.4 billion idlis over the past 12 years, will expand into Bahrain, Kuwait and Muscat after its new plant in Dubai comes on board. It is also looking at test-launching its products in the US.