The markets rally has been fuelled by very low interest rates in developed markets and the revival of global growth has given it an additional boost. Photo: MintBloomberg estimates put the MSCI India one year forward price-earnings multiple at 18.6 at present. The last time this valuation yardstick was so high was in 2009, when the markets were recovering from the global financial crash of 2008.But it isn’t just the Indian stock market—markets everywhere show high valuations. The MSCI Emerging Markets index is also at valuations comparable to those last seen in 2009. The MSCI Asia ex-Japan index has a higher valuation now than what it had in January 2008. And the MSCI World index, which tracks developed markets, has a PE multiple higher than anything seen in the last 10 years.So the Indian markets are rocketing up in tandem with global equities.Indian equity valuations have mostly been at a premium to other emerging markets, reflecting the country’s higher growth. At present, MSCI India is valued at a premium of 35% or so to the MSCI Asia ex-Japan index, which represents the region. That is not a particularly high premium for recent years—it was over 40% for much of 2014, 2015 and 2016, even going above 60% in August 2015, as the accompanying chart shows. We have the same story with the MSCI Emerging Markets index, with the Indian market’s current premium over it being lower than what it used to be over much of 2014, 2015 and 2016.A look at the recent history of the India premium over MSCI Asia ex-Japan is interesting. Between the middle of 2015 to mid-2016, the premium remained well above 40%. The decline started in June 2016 and by September that year the premium had fallen below 30%. Demonetisation hurt the India premium, making it go down to 22%. The introduction of the goods and services tax (GST) delayed the recovery, but by October last year the premium was back above 35%, which is the current level.It’s no coincidence that the India premium was so high in 2015, when crude oil prices fell and India’s GDP growth went to 8%. By mid-2016, the windfall from falling oil prices disappeared, the banking sector developed deep cracks, India’s growth came down and so did the India premium. After the twin blows of demonetisation and GST, it is only now that the premium has started creeping up again, in the hope that growth will soon rebound.In the last six months, the one-year forward PE for MSCI India has moved up from 17.6 to 18.6. Over the same period, MSCI India’s valuation premium over MSCI Asia ex-Japan has gone up from 33% to 35%. In other words, almost all the rise in valuation in the Indian markets is due to circumstances affecting the entire region. It is to global factors therefore that investors must look for signs that the party is ending.This doesn’t mean that valuations are not high. But they are high across the world and have little to do with India-specific causes. The global rally reflects investors’ belief in Goldilocks—the belief that the scenario of above-trend growth and below-trend inflation will continue. The rally has been fuelled by very low interest rates in developed markets and the revival of global growth has given it an additional boost. Investors also believe central banks will do their best not to rock the boat. Indeed, the story of the last 10 years has been the story of the developed markets. In January 2008, the premium enjoyed by MSCI India’s valuation over that of MSCI World was 55%. Now, it’s 9%.
The Economic Survey cites high-frequency data such as exports, factory output and non-food credit growth to up the growth estimate for 2017-18 to 6.75% from 6.5% projected by the Central Statistics Office. Photo: Priyanka Parashar/MintNew Delhi: The Economic Survey says the worst is over and the Indian economy is poised to rebound to grow in the range of 7-7.5% in 2018-19.It credits this recovery to structural policy fixes, including the decision to put in place a bankruptcy code to deal with the bad debt problem—which it believes had become a binding constraint on economic growth. According to the survey, demonetisation of high-value currencies, together with the rollout of the goods and services tax (GST), has led to more people being brought under the tax net and the formal economy is much bigger than what it is estimated at.Optimistic while the survey is, it makes a case for policy vigilance to deal with downside risks stemming from rising crude oil prices and any setback to the ongoing recovery of the global economy.“If macro-economic stability is kept under control, the ongoing reforms are stabilized, and the world economy remains buoyant as today, growth could start recovering towards its medium-term economic potential of at least 8%,” the Survey said.The survey, authored by a team led by chief economic adviser Arvind Subramanian and presented in Parliament by finance minister Arun Jaitley on the first day of the budget session, cites high-frequency data such as exports, factory output and non-food credit growth to up the growth estimate for 2017-18 to 6.75% from 6.5% projected by the Central Statistics Office (CSO).Given real gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 6% in the first half (April-September) of 2017-18, this implies that growth in the second half (October-March) would rebound to 7.5% in the fourth quarter (January-March).The statistics department will release the third quarter GDP data on 28 February.Setting the reform agenda for the next financial year, the Survey makes a case for shrinking unviable public sector banks, privatizing Air India, facilitating easier GST compliance and decisively resolving bankruptcy cases.Former finance minister and Congress leader P. Chidambaram said the survey was depressing but candid. “The future course of the economy is conditional on many ifs. After listing the unfinished work (and there are many), the survey seems to prepare the grounds for failure by praying that the world economy maintains its growth momentum and oil prices do not persist at current levels. The outlook is therefore uncertain, if not bleak,” he added.The survey acknowledged the electoral pressures on a government in the final year of its term, and batted for less aggressive fiscal consolidation.It said setting overly ambitious targets for consolidation—especially in a pre-election year—based on optimistic forecasts that carry a high risk of not being realized will not garner credibility. “Pragmatically steering between these extremes would suggest the following: a modest consolidation that credibly signals a return to the path of gradual but steady fiscal deficit reductions,” it said.Jaitley has set a fiscal deficit target of 3.2% of GDP for 2017-18 and aims to lower it to 3% in 2018-19. However, less-than-expected revenue collections, especially after implementation of GST, and higher expenditure could generate fiscal pressures.The survey foresees higher-than-expected inflation in the second half of the current fiscal and projects a nominal GDP growth rate of 10.5% against 9.5% estimated by CSO. This could help the finance minister contain the fiscal slippage in 2017-18.The survey also cautioned against the eventuality of a sharp correction in elevated stock prices, which could provoke a “sudden stall” in capital flows. Since end-December 2015, the Sensex has surged 46% in rupee terms and 52% in dollar terms.It, however, acknowledged the decision of the National Democratic Alliance to rationalize subsidies by restricting it to the poor. According to it, there has been considerable progress in providing bank accounts, cooking gas, housing, power and toilets to improve the lives of the poor and marginalized.“The pace and magnitude of this improvement (in the lives of the poor) will depend upon the extent to which increased physical availability/provision is converted into greater actual use,” the survey observed.Anuja contributed to this story.
Modern social contracts are built on a wide base of tax payers. Almost all Indians pay regressive indirect taxes but too few of us pay progressive direct taxes. Illustration: Jayachandran/MintThe new Economic Survey written by the team of finance ministry economists led by Arvind Subramanian provides compelling evidence of how the Indian economy is becoming more formalized. The reason this shift is important is not just because of the possibility of higher tax revenues for the government to spend; it is also about a profoundly different social contract between citizens and the state.There are four key shifts that are mentioned in different parts of the Economic Survey.First, the introduction of the goods and services tax (GST) has brought more firms into the tax net. The number of enterprises paying indirect taxes has gone up by 3.4 million, an increase of 50%. The bulk of the new entrants are enterprises that are in the business-to-business or export sectors, or what economists would call the production of intermediates.Second, only around a quarter of the 240 million Indian working outside farms file their income tax returns. The controversial demonetization decision taken in November 2016 seems to have led to a statistically significant increase in the number of new income tax filers, after controlling for obvious problems such as the previous trend as well as seasonal patterns of change.Third, the Indian workforce is more formalized than most people believed till recently. Nearly a third of the non-farm Indian workforce of 240 million has some social security coverage. And more than half of the non-farm workforce is employed in firms that now pay taxes.Fourth, the demonetization shock is one reason—and perhaps not the only reason—why Indians are putting a greater proportion of their savings in the formal financial sector. Bank deposits swelled after November 2016, though the booming stock market has also made financial savings through mutual funds more attractive compared to gold or real estate.These four shifts—more firms paying indirect taxes, more individual filing income tax returns, a big increase in the proportion of formal jobs and the increase in savings in the formal financial sector—can have profound effects on the Indian economy if they are sustained. It is quite likely that these claims will be the source of heated debate in the coming weeks.It is useful to point out that much of the data offered by the finance ministry comes from the GST system, rather than from surveys. The mining of GST data is part of the welcome introduction of Big Data into Indian policy discourse. The Economic Survey released a year ago had similarly used Big Data and satellite images to estimate issues as diverse as interstate migration to the extent of Indian urbanization. The finance ministry economists deserve kudos for their methodological innovations.What does such an overdue shift to formal economic activity potentially mean?The Indian nation state sits on a very weak fiscal base. It is neither able to invest in national security or provide public goods or create a social security system without running up destabilizing fiscal deficits. A careful data analysis by Tadit Kundu and Pramit Bhattacharya that was recently published in this newspaper showed that India has a tax-to-GDP ratio that is broadly similar to what other countries had at a similar stage of development. The question is whether that ratio can be increased as India gets richer, which is difficult unless more economic activity moves into the formal sectors. The new data offers hope.However, the issue is not just about fiscal capacity. Modern social contracts are built on a wide base of tax payers. Almost all Indians pay regressive indirect taxes but too few of us pay progressive direct taxes. This newspaper hopes that more direct tax payments by individuals as well as enterprises will not only create fiscal space for lower GST rates but also provide incentives for citizens to demand better governance.It is quite possible these four changes will lead to partisan debate about whether the formalization of the Indian economy can be explained by the two big policy risks taken by the Narendra Modi government—demonetization as well as the decision to push for a compromised GST. These debates will generate more heat than light. What is far more important at this juncture is to look at the claims made in the new Economic Survey more closely, ask how the process of formalization can be accelerated and figure out what the deeper effects of this overdue change is.
If the Union Budget looks ahead at the year and makes forecasts on how the government will gather revenue and spend it, the Economic Survey looks back to take stock of what happened and then lays out the big-picture goals, challenges and scenarios for the Indian economy. It is more of a vision statement than a to-do list. Just as the Budget document has the signature flavour of the finance minister, the Survey carries the DNA print of the chief economic advisor. The key message of Arvind Subramanian’s Economic Survey for 2017-18 can be summed up in one phrase: revival and risk, and he shows this in one chart on the behaviour of bond prices and stock prices. (See table)The rise and rise of the stock market points to the revival in the economy and the rise in bond yields points to worries on deficit, inflation and oil prices going up. Why are the stock markets rising? The Survey finds that the revival part of the story is “robust and broad based”. With the shock of demonetization and the Goods and Services Tax behind us, gross domestic product (GDP) growth for the current year is estimated to be 6.75% and for the next year between 7 and 7.5 %, making India the fastest growing major economy in the world. The reason for the robustness is the implementation of several deep reform initiatives. GST reform has added another 3.4 million indirect tax payers and GST collections are on an upward trajectory. In fact, the overall trend for widening the tax net is positive. The Survey finds that post-demonetisation, there has been a 0.8% monthly increase in new direct tax filers—an annual growth of 10% or about 1.8 million new taxpayers.India’s economic growth had stalled due to the twin balance sheet problem wherein firms could not invest more due to unpaid loans they had taken in the past, and public sector banks were burdened by unpaid loans taken by corporate entities that caused an overhang of bad debt and prevented fresh lending. Like a Quentin Tarantino movie, with everybody pointing guns at everybody else, the economy was in a frozen frame. The enactment of the bankruptcy code and the process of debt resolution has begun to solve one part of the problem where firms are going in for resolution and repayment rather than stalling the process through court cases. The bank viability issue is getting sorted by the capitalization of some public sector banks. The first signs of credit off-take are visible, says the survey with real non-food credit growth rebounding to 4% in November 2017 on a year-on-year basis, while the squeeze on real credit to industry is abating. The rising stock market is taking note of this reform and has moved higher and higher over 2017. This is clearly worrying the economist in Subramanian who flagged the risks of a runaway market several times in his presentation after the Survey was tabled in Parliament.Rising yields on the bond market are telling a different story and this one is about risk. We know that bond yields rise when bond prices fall. Bond prices fall when the market thinks that interest rates will rise. The bond market is worried about three things: a rise in inflation, in oil prices and in the deficit numbers. Inflation numbers are showing an uptick after 13 months of staying below the target 4% number. The government already hit 112% of the total deficit number in the first eight months of FY 2018. Subramanian said in his press conference that every $10 hike in oil prices shaves 0.2-0.3% off GDP, worsens the current account deficit by about $10 billion and hikes inflation by about 0.2%. Without saying it explicitly, the Survey also signals that the bond market is worried about this being a pre-election year and therefore nobody is expecting a very tight sticking-to-deficit targets laid out earlier. It says: “Reflecting largely fiscal developments at the center, a pause in general government fiscal consolidation relative to 2016-17 cannot be ruled out.” That’s what the bond market worries about.What should the government do to fan the revival and mitigate the risk? “It should finish what it has started,” says Subramanian. That means continuing reform, stabilizing the GST, completing the twin balance sheet actions by focussing on the ‘reform’ part of the solution, privatizing Air India, and staving off threats to macro-economic stability. The last point is clearly directed at a government that is in a pre-election year and it says: don’t lose the focus on fiscal prudence. It does look as if the roll-out of a universal basic income in this pre-election year will not happen if the government takes the warnings of the Survey seriously.
Monika Halan works in the area of consumer protection in finance. She is consulting editor Mint and on the board of FPSB India. She can be reached at monika.h@livemint.com.Chief economic adviser Arvind Subramanian gestures as he addresses the media after annual Economic Survey 2017-18 was tabled in Parliament in New Delhi on Monday. Photo: PTINew Delhi: Chief economic adviser Arvind Subramanian on Monday indicated that the scope for Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to lower interest rate may be limited with growth picking up and inflation hardening.RBI, which is slated to announce the next monetary policy review on 7 February, has maintained status quo on interest rate since August last year. “By definition if growth is picking up and inflation is rising, there is less scope of monetary easing. By definition that’s true,” he told PTI when asked about possibility of rate cut by the central bank.He added however that it would be inappropriate for him to comment on rate cut as it is the domain of the Reserve Bank of India. RBI had last cut interest rate by 25 basis points to 6% on 2 August 2017. On whether he has changed his views on monetary policy stance, Subramanian said, it is “relative to what I said earlier...not relative to today but what I said earlier. I am not saying rate should go up at all”.Asked whether RBI missed the bus for lowering interest rate, he said, “For about 18 months we could have had lower interest rate. Now, I think they are probably more consistent with inflation outlook”. Now the cycle has turned, he said, adding that the inflationary pressure is mounting. Retail inflation crossed the RBI’s comfort level and rose to 5.21% in December on rise in prices of food items.The retail inflation, based on Consumer Price Index (CPI), was 4.88% in November. In December 2015, it was 3.41%. The Reserve Bank has been asked by the government to keep inflation at 4%, plus or minus 2 %, and its rise beyond the comfort zone will put pressure on the central bank not cut interest rate (repo rate).Observing that directionally economy seems to be picking up quite nicely, he said, “exports have also been picking up briskly and driving India’s economic growth... Over the next few years, we can grow between 8-10 per cent,” he said.India, as per the Economic Survey, is expected to regain the world’s fastest growing major economy tag as it is likely to clock 7-7.5% growth rate in 2018-19, up from 6.75% in the current fiscal. Earlier, addressing the media, Subramanian said there are concerns like high global oil prices and a sharp correction in elevated stock market as they could suddenly impact capital flows.“We need to watch out oil prices...we had thought that oil prices would no go beyond USD 55-60...we were wrong,” he said, adding that the crude level for calculation of gross domestic product (GDP) for 2018-19 is estimated at 12% higher than the current fiscal.Saudi company Aramco’s listing may be contributing to rise in oil prices, he added. “The higher assets prices go, the more vigilant we should be... Indian stock rise is different from other economies, as Indian stock prices rise reflects massive portfolio reallocation from gold and real estate to stocks. So, heightened vigilance is called for,” he said.Going forward, he said, the impact of goods and services tax (GST) and demonetisation will be less or zero. He ruled out any negative impact of GST and demonetisation in the next fiscal. “Going forward, my sense is that we are going to see big increase in GST revenue collection. The process of improvement in compliance is going to be important... Over some time horizon of 3-5 years, we can think of having one GST rate. In the short run, there is greater case for simplification and rationalisation,” he said.On farm sector distress, Subramanaian said, “We need to have mechanism to protect farmers from downside risks...we will have to get more people out of agriculture.”
The government is of the view that steps like GST help address the issue of corruption. Photo: PTINew Delhi: Tackling corruption is rewarding, but the job comes with its fair share of challenges. That’s one of the “broader lessons for the Indian economy” listed by the Economic Survey of 2017-18, tabled in Parliament on Monday.The observation comes amid a government move to encourage greater transparency and put in place stricter anti-corruption measures in public life. While talking about the challenges, the Economic Survey cited the examples of the November 2016 demonetisation of high-value currency notes and the July 2017 roll-out of the goods and services tax (GST).“...while there are significant social and economic benefits to attacking corruption and weak governance, addressing those pathologies entails challenges. In the case of the GST and demonetization, informal cash-intensive sectors of the economy were impacted,” the Economic Survey said in its analysis.It added: “...in the case of spectrum, coal, and renewables, auctions may have led to a winners’ curse, whereby firms overbid for assets, leading to adverse consequences in each of the sectors; but they created transparency and avoided rent-seeking with enormous benefits, actual and perceptional.”Corruption has been a key political and electoral issue particularly since the 2014 general elections in which suspected irregularities in the allocation of spectrum and coal blocks were major campaign issues. The government is of the view that steps like demonetisation, GST and stricter action against benami transactions help address the issue. Experts agreed.“The post-demonetisation era saw the absence of any deterrence by way of legal provision because our current laws go soft on those engaging in financial and other online frauds,” said Pavan Duggal, cyber law expert at the Supreme Court.A Union home ministry official said experts were working to establish a system which would help tackle cases of online fraud post-demonetisation.“Since demonetization, a lot of financial transactions have been carried out online and we are making sure that it all stays secure,” said the official, requesting anonymity.
The way to fund more investment, albeit not a long-term sustainable one, is the obvious one of privatizing government white elephants such as Air India. Photo: Abhijit Bhatlekar/MintOn the eve of the Union budget, there is a lot of talk on the need to balance growth with fiscal prudence. That is rather mystifying, given the fact that, as we are told time and again, India is the world’s fastest growing major economy.Consider the facts. The International Monetary Fund has recently predicted, in its latest World Economic Outlook, that India’s GDP growth will pick up from 6.7% this year to 7.4% in 2018-19 and to 7.8% in 2019-20. The World Bank too, in a recent report, said India’s growth in the next fiscal year will be 7.3% and will then go up further to 7.5%. Back home, the latest Reserve Bank of India survey of professional forecasters put GDP growth for 2018-19 at 7.5%. The Economic Survey, prudently hedging its bets, puts growth at 7-7.5% for 2018-19. All of them agree growth is going to get better.Could it be there’s a disconnect between growth at the macro level and at the ground level? Not at the corporate level—even a conservative brokerage like Kotak expects Nifty earnings year-on-year growth to accelerate from around 5% this fiscal to 24% in 2018-19. The corporate sector is expected to rebound next fiscal.These forecasts aren’t just statistical exercises. Consider the improvements in the economy. First, everybody agrees that the global economy is, for the first time in years, seeing a synchronous recovery. Stock markets are rallying on the prospects of above-trend earnings growth accompanied by below-trend inflation. That has revived the initial public offering (IPO) and private placement markets in India, making it easier for companies to raise money. The global recovery should improve India’s export prospects. Everybody expects the domestic economy to recover from the disruption caused by the introduction of the goods and services tax (GST). Economists have been telling us that GST will add to GDP growth. Banks are being recapitalized. Credit growth is picking up. The promised benefits of the Bankruptcy Act could lead to a revival of private investment. We’ve improved the ease of doing business. Foreign direct investment is pouring into the country. Why on earth do we need a fiscal push to growth?In fact, this is a time when we should signal that we’re back on the path of fiscal consolidation. In recent years, while the central government has been pruning its fiscal deficit, the fiscal situation of the states has been deteriorating. Pressures due to the implementation of the Seventh Pay Commission recommendations by the states and the agricultural debt waivers are likely to weigh on state finances. In fact, bond yields have jumped in the last few months and with deposit growth slowing and credit growth picking up, it’s a matter of time before bank interest rates too start moving up. Oil prices are high and that will have an effect on the current account deficit. The latest data shows our trade deficit is widening rapidly. Inflation is likely to go up as growth strengthens—IMF predicts average consumer price inflation at 5.5% for 2018-19. The Economic Survey warns of high stock market prices and possible disruptions in global markets. A loose fiscal policy at a time when there are so many risks to our hard-won macro stability may be adding fuel to the fire.What then explains the clamour for looser fiscal policy? Very likely, it is due to the fact that the growth is not percolating down to the ground level. To be specific, there are four sectors—agriculture, construction, the informal sector and labour-intensive exports—where we could do with much higher growth. We have a problem with these pockets of the economy which unfortunately provide the bulk of the employment for the masses. The lack of growth in these sectors is therefore a serious political problem. It is a reflection of the fact that growth in India has been very unequal.It’s not as if the government hasn’t tried to address these issues. It has tried to provide jobs for the masses by building roads and through the affordable housing scheme. Farm distress has been sought to be addressed by loan waivers and crop insurance. GST is expected to be beneficial to exporters. But obviously, if the government is thinking of relaxing the fiscal deficit to fund these sectors, it isn’t enough.The way to fund more investment in these sectors, albeit not a long-term sustainable one, is the obvious one of privatizing government white elephants such as Air India. True, the current government hasn’t shown much of an appetite for privatization, but the Air India sale should set an example, hopefully followed by the sale of other loss-making companies owned by the central and state governments. With the stock markets so high, this is the ideal time for selling off government assets. That should raise enough money to spend on those segments of the economy that provide the most jobs.In short, now is not the time to jettison our hard-won macro-economic stability, or policies that have enabled us to move from being one of “the fragile five” to a favoured investment destination. Fiscal prudence is important in achieving that objective. As the Economic Survey puts it, “The agenda for the next year consequently remains full: stabilizing the GST, completing the TBS (Twin Balance Sheet) actions, privatizing Air India, and staving off threats to macro-economic stability.”Manas Chakravarty looks at trends and issues in the financial markets.