Tax policy and principles are built on a solid foundation, and they should work as efficiently and effectively on all kinds of business models. Pradeep Gaur/MintIt would not be out of place to state that despite the many twists, turns (including U-turns) and travails that the goods and services tax (GST) rollout has seen, it is the working of the GST Council that is the all-curing balm.Cut to income tax, where we deal with a law first introduced in 1922. The current 1961 version has perhaps more text on insertions, deletions, provisos and explanations than the original law itself, and with the loudening global pitch on base erosion (read: protectionism) and profit shifting (read: sharing), the pace of change will only increase.Whether one asks the common man, or a big enterprise, there are fundamentally three issues that create an overhang. No, the first is not about the tax rate, which by all means is due for a reduction, as much as it is the need for clarity and certainty. The second is to walk the talk—there is often many a slip between intention, drafting and implementation. The third relates to being futuristic. With our population, India will remain the hottest, largest and most lucrative market. It is almost impossible to predict what the next waves will be. Rather than, therefore, believing that owing to our customer base advantage there ought to be a one-way ticket to tax collections, it is time that a futuristic view is taken with balanced objectives.Addressing these by way of budget amendments, by its very design, will always be reactive, often be a year late and rarely be conceived beyond the revenue implications for the next 12 months. Can we borrow a leaf from GST here?Instead of a committee that is set up every few years to make recommendations to simplify the law (and reports that then languish in bookshelves), why not have an income tax council, made up of some permanent and some invited members, that meets every now and then, as the need arises, and one that does not stop at making recommendations, but that works through with the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) to issue the necessary clarifications or guidance, and works to amend the law when needed. There is a waiting opportunity to weave this concept into the new income tax law being drafted so that there is necessary legal sanction.It will be beyond my competence to make recommendations on the composition of the council, but I would certainly prepare an agenda for its first meeting.Taxation of capital gainsThe last few years have seen see-sawing on taxation of capital gains. The period of holding for long-term assets was increased and then reduced. Budget 2017 introduced limitations to the stock market exemptions. Foreign parties get taxed at a reduced rate and are not subject to minimum alternate tax (MAT), whereas Indian companies are. The additional 10% tax on dividends also does not apply to foreign shareholders. My case here is to deliberate on what is the philosophy to be followed, to what extent is there a need to incentivize capital and investment creation and then have a framework that can stand without questions being raised every year. Include in this debate whether private investment also needs exemptions, or lower rates, to what extent, why and for how long there ought to be differences between foreign and Indian investors and how retail and institutional investors will be differentiated, if at all.Start-upsA pill should cure and the side-effects should not substitute the original disease. Start-ups need a simple dose that reads: no limitations on carry-forward of losses, don’t tax my capital (which is so hard to raise in any case), and provide me with a tax holiday once I start making profits. The moment the council speaks to a handful of entrepreneurs the pain will be palpable and the prescription forthcoming.The digital economyOld school wisdom says don’t tweak and don’t have knee-jerk reactions. Tax policy and principles are built on a solid foundation, and they should work as efficiently and effectively on all kinds of business models. If a foreign company sells shoes to customers and does not pay tax in India, why should a company selling digital products? We have a world-class GST system (well, almost) to collect taxes based on consumption. Coming up with new taxes that are levied on the consumers is only as good as increasing the rate of GST, and finally, is paid for by the end-users like all of us reading this. Our judiciary and legislature haven’t sorted out how software is to be taxed for decades on, so I only dread to even think how much complexity we will be adding to our ecosystem if we do not adopt a logical and simple approach on the digital world.
Meeting adjourned!The author is partner and India leader–corporate and international tax, PWC.Mahindra Lifespace, the real estate arm of Mahindra Group, partnered with HDFC Capital last year to jointly invest Rs500 crore over the next three years to develop affordable housing projects across cities.Bengaluru: Mahindra Happinest Developers Ltd (MHDL), a joint venture between Mahindra Lifespace Developers Ltd and HDFC Capital Advisors Ltd, will launch its first affordable housing project at Palghar, near Mumbai in February, with homes priced at Rs8 lakh and above, a top company executive said.In the first phase of the project, there will be 850 units across nine acres. Entry price for a one-room kitchen home is around Rs8 lakh, which goes up to Rs20 lakh for a two-bedroom home.After half of the homes in the first phase are sold, the company will launch a second phase over another 10-11 acres.Mahindra Lifespace, the real estate arm of Mahindra Group, partnered with HDFC Capital last year to jointly invest Rs500 crore over the next three years to develop affordable housing projects across cities.The plan is to build a pipeline of projects of around 7-8 million sq. ft in the next couple of years under the HDFC platform.“We want to focus on Mumbai and Pune for now, and then look at Bangalore and Haryana. We are scouting for land parcels and the biggest priority today is finding the right location, with good connectivity because we are looking at end users for our projects,” Anita Arjundas, managing director and CEO, Mahindra Lifespace Developers said over the phone.“We are building homes at sub-Rs3,000 per sq ft, but we may go up to Rs5,000 per sq ft if we find a location that is closer to town,” she said.Mahindra Lifespace ventured into the affordable housing segment in 2014, through the brand, Happinest and has since launched two projects—in Boisar near Mumbai and Avadi, Chennai.The new Mahindra Happinest entity has also identified a second land parcel and is in talks to buy 10 acres in Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR) for a second project, with around 7-8 lakh sq ft of saleable area.Once the due diligence process is over, the transaction should close in the June quarter and the project will be launched in the second half of 2018, Arjundas said.In a further boost to affordable housing, in January, the goods and service tax (GST) council recommended rationalization of GST rates on such projects. GST would be charged at 8% on the total value of under-construction properties, which would be 4 percentage points less than the earlier effective rate of 12%.
The GST e-way bill, designed to prevent underreporting and evasion of taxes, is mandatory for all inter-state movement of goods from 1 February.New Delhi: The e-way bill, key to preventing tax evasion under the goods and services tax (GST), will be rolled out nationwide from Thursday, the day finance minister Arun Jaitley will present the Union Budget 2018, amid persistent concerns in some quarters that its enforcement could trigger fresh economic disruption.The GST e-way bill, an electronic documentation tracking the movement of goods, is mandatory for all inter-state movement of goods from 1 February. It is designed to prevent underreporting and evasion of taxes.The e-way bill is a key part of the GST architecture. It was put on hold until after GST, which was implemented from 1 July, stabilized. Over 2.84 million GST e-way bills have been generated in the trial phase so far.“We rolled out the e-way bill system for all states from 17 January. Given the experience so far of the last two weeks, we are optimistic that the rollout will be smooth,” said Prakash Kumar, chief executive officer of the Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN).GSTN expects that around 700,000-800,000 GST e-way bills will be issued every day across the country, based on rough calculations of the transit permit data issued in the old value-added tax regime. More than 340,000 e-way bills were issued on 30 January alone, Kumar said. So far, more than 670,000 taxpayers and transporters have registered under the e-way bill system.The GST e-way bill will also be mandatory for all movement of goods within a state from 1 June, although at least 13 states are likely to implement it from 1 February.An e-way bill has to be generated for all movement of goods—within or outside a state—valued at more than Rs50,000 by prior online registration of the consignment. The supplier and the transporter can upload the details about the shipment and get a unique e-way bill number.An e-way bill will be valid for a day for a distance less than 100km. For every 100km thereafter, the validity will be an additional day from the relevant date.An e-way bill will have to be cancelled within 24 hours of it being issued.There are also safeguards in place which do not allow a consignment to be held up for more than 30 minutes.Industry is seeking a relaxation of rules.To reduce the compliance burden, industry lobby group Confederation of Indian Industry wants e-way bills to be issued only for the movement of goods valued above Rs5 lakh.Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) has demanded that the validity of GST e-way bills be extended to a minimum of 5 days and more time be given for cancellation.However, the GST Council, the apex decision-making authority, did not accept the suggestions.“Implementing e-way bill is a turning point in the transportation business as it will lay the foundation for the success of GST. E-way bill leaves little chance for tax evasion,” said S.P. Singh, senior fellow at transport research body Indian Foundation of Transport Research and Training.The combined volume of inter-state trade in all the states and intra-state trade in the 13 states committed to implementing the e-way bill for local movement of goods from Thursday will account for 65-70% of all cargo movement in the country, explained Singh.According to a logistics industry executive who asked not to be named, truck bookings rose about 30% in the first three weeks of January from the previous month, after which bookings for the coming weeks subsided, indicating that businesses and traders wanted to build up inventory before the electronic permits became compulsory.