New Delhi, January 4: It is difficult for GDP to cross 7% this fiscal unless the base is revised downwards, says SBI Research Chief Economist Soumya Kanti Ghosh Former Planning Commission Deputy Chairman Montek Singh Ahluwalia said the GDP growth would be around 6.2% to 6.3% for the current fiscal Sugata Bhattacharya, chief economist at Axis Bank, says the Gross Value Added (GVA) would be 6.6-6.8% for the current fiscal Former Planning Commission member and senior economist Abhijit Sen said the GDP growth would be in the range of 6 to 6.5%, citing glitches on tax collection front
India’s economic growth is likely to be below 7% this fiscal, say experts, citing GST disruption and lingering impact of note ban. The Indian economy grew at 7.1% in 2016-17, against 8% in 2015-16. The Central Statistics Office (CSO) is scheduled to release its advance estimates of national income 2017-18 on Friday. It is difficult for GDP to cross 7% this fiscal unless the base is revised downwards. The economy is expected to do well in the third and fourth quarter, SBI Research Chief Economist Soumya Kanti Ghosh said. Ghosh said the GDP growth would be 6.5% on unchanged base last year. Elaborating further, Ghosh said the growth could be higher if the last year’s expansion is revised downwards because lower base last fiscal would result in higher growth for 2017-18. Echoing similar views, former Planning Commission Deputy Chairman Montek Singh Ahluwalia said the GDP growth would be around 6.2% to 6.3% for the current fiscal. Sugata Bhattacharya, chief economist at Axis Bank, said the Gross Value Added (GVA) would be 6.6-6.8% for the current fiscal. We have not factored in tax collection in the current fiscal. But if the tax collection remain robust then the GDP growth could be higher, he said. The GVA is a new concept introduced by the CSO to measure the performance of the economy. The GDP is tabulated by adding taxes to the GVA after reducing subsidies from that. Former Planning Commission member and senior economist Abhijit Sen said the GDP growth would be in the range of 6 to 6.5% this fiscal, citing glitches on tax collection front after the GST rollout. He was skeptical about buoyancy in the latest PMI data and other numbers used for showing rosy picture of state of economy at this point of time.
New Delhi, January 4: India's economic growth is estimated to slow down to four-year low of 6.5 per cent this fiscal, the lowest under the NDA regime, mainly due to GST impact on manufacturing and subdued farm output. The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was 7.1 per cent in 2016-17 and 8 per cent in the preceding year. It was 7.5 per cent in 2014-15. The Narendra Modi-led NDA government had assumed office in May 2014. The growth of gross value added (GVA) in manufacturing sector too is expected to decelerate to 4.6 per cent this fiscal, down from 7.9 per cent in 2016-17. As regards the farm sector, the expansion in activities in agriculture, forestry and fishing sectors is likely to slow to 2.1 per cent in the current fiscal from 4.9 per cent in the preceding year. "Is there an impact of the GST (Goods and Service Tax) on average growth? The answer is, to some extent, of course and I explain why," Chief Statistician T C A Anant told reporters after the Central Statistics Office released advance estimates of national accounts today. Elaborating further, he said, "When we did the first quarter estimates, we had explained this that because of fact that the GST is going to be implemented from July 1, there will be natural anticipation of GST...by the manufacturing sector. Since the first quarter is part of whole year, the manufacturing includes the first quarter as part of it. Yes that impact is built into the exercise." Commenting on the CSO estimates, Economic Affairs Secretary Subhash Chandra Garg said GDP growth forecast of 6.5 per cent for 2017-18 implies growth of 7 per cent for the second half of the fiscal. "(This) confirms strong turnaround of economy. Investment growth of almost twice of last year’s indicates investment reviving," he said in a tweet. About the agriculture sector, Chief Statistician Anant said, "So far agriculture is concerned, there is certain amount of statistical base reversion to mean, which is seen because last is very high growth rate after continuous years of drought." He further said, "Actual total production figure would be the second highest in very long period of time. This is not unusual growth rate of agriculture in a good year."On recovery, Anant explained that the growth in the first and second quarters were estimated at 5.7 per cent and 6.3 per cent, respectively and for rest of year, it is worked out at 7 per cent, indicating an increasing trend. The growth of real Gross Value Added (GVA) in 2017-18 is anticipated at 6.1 per cent as against 6.6 per cent in the previous year. Economic activities were affected by demonetisation announced on November 8, 2016 and subsequent implementation of a new indirect tax regime (GST) from July 1 in the current financial year. A barometer of investment, Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF) at current prices is estimated at Rs 43.84 lakh crore in 2017-18 as against Rs 41.18 lakh crore in 2016-17. At constant (2011-12) prices, the GFCF is estimated at Rs 37.65 lakh crore in 2017-18 as against Rs 36.02 lakh crore in 2016-17. CII Director General Chandrajit Banerjee said it is heartening that gross fixed capital formation is on a recovery path, as a turnaround in investments is imperative for a sustained recovery to take hold. According to the CSO, the sectors which registered growth rate of over 7 per cent are: public administration, defence and other services; trade, hotels, transport, communication and services related to broadcasting; electricity, gas, water supply and other utility services; and financial, real estate and professional services.
New Delhi, January 4: The growth of the Indian economy is estimated to fall to a four-year low of 6.5% in 2017-18, a data point which is likely to worry the government just weeks before the presentation of the Union Budget. This will be the slowest economic growth under the Modi government as its policy managers had been hoping that if 2017 was the year of disruptive reforms like demonetisation, GST and Bankruptcy Law, 2018 would be the year to reap the rewards. The growth in GDP during 2017-18 is estimated at 6.5% as compared to 7.1% in 2016-17, said the Central Statistics Office (CSO) while announcing the first advance estimates of National Income 2017-18. The GDP growth was 7.1% in 2016-17 and 8% in the preceding year. It was 7.5% in 2014-15. As per the CSO data, the expansion in activities in agriculture, forestry and fishing is likely to slow to 2.1% in the current fiscal from 4.9% in the preceding year. The growth in manufacturing sector too is expected to decelerate to 4.6% this fiscal, down from 7.9% in 2016-17. NITI Aayog Vice-Chairman Rajiv Kumar said the GDP growth will become more robust in 2018-19. He said the second half GDP growth in 2017-18 has risen to 7%, bringing the annual growth rate to 6.5%. He pointed out that economic activity had been picking up over the past three quarters and can be expected to strengthen in the coming period with the manufacturing PMI now reading at a five-year high and FMCG demand picking up briskly. He said the estimates assume significance in the wake of the fact that the higher second half growth has come despite a waning of public sector expenditures which had peaked in 2016-17 on account of implementation of the recommendations of the Seventh Pay Commission. In a recent note, foreign brokerage Credit Suisse had cautioned on growth due to the distress in unorganised and agriculture sectors. In a note, Credit Suisse said 2017 has been one of the most challenging years for the Indian economy in the recent past as the economy has reeled under severe pressure from the government’s anti-corruption drive and the GST implementation. While we are enthused with these reforms that could potentially push India’s GDP growth structurally on the higher path, the drag from these reforms  although fading  is here to stay for some more time as around 45% of India’s GDP and 85%-90% of employment come from the unorganised and agriculture sectors which are under severe distress and will recover gradually, leading to below potential growth in 2018, it said. Some analysts said the estimates are based on limited data and may not be factoring in the expected pick-up in growth. Aditi Nayar, Principal Economist, ICRA, said the advance estimates for the full year have been based on limited data, which would be available for a period of 6-9 months for different sectors. Therefore, they are not fully factoring in the expected pickup in growth in the later months of FY2018, related to a favourable base effect and a ‘catch up’ following the subdued growth momentum in H1 FY2018. Accordingly, the advance estimates for GDP and GVA growth appear to be understating economic expansion for FY2018, in our view, Nayar added.
