New Delhi, January 15: Wholesale price-based inflation eased to a three-month low of 3.58 per cent in December 2017 as food prices softened, prompting the industry to seek measures in the Budget to strengthen agriculture supply chain. Wholesale price index (WPI)-based inflation was 3.93 per cent in November 2017 and 2.10 per cent in December 2016. Inflation on food articles slowed to 4.72 per cent in December, from 6.06 per cent in November 2017, the official data released today showed. In fuel and power segment, inflation rose to 9.16 per cent in December against 8.82 per cent in previous month. Industry chamber Ficci said continued efforts of the government to strengthen food supply mechanism can help in bringing down food inflation further. We also look forward to the budget to provide details on more specific measures towards strengthening of agriculture supply chain for effective management of food prices. We hope to see inclusion of petrol and diesel under GST in coming months, which should also help in lowering the pressures of fuel inflation, Ficci President Rashesh Shah said. ICRA Principal Economist Aditi Nayar said that despite the sharp rise in crude oil prices in the current month, WPI inflation is expected in a range of 3.2-3.6 per cent in the March quarter. While the MPC members would primarily weigh the uptrend in the retail inflation, the dip in the WPI inflation strengthens the case for a pause in the February policy review and fairly hawkish tone of the policy document, Nayar said. Ficci demanded lowering of interest rates by the RBI in its next monetary policy review on February 7 saying it is critical to boost investments and build the growth momentum. Retail inflation breached the RBI’s comfort level to touch 5.21 per cent in December on rise in prices of food items, especially vegetables, according to the data released last week. In its last policy review in December, the RBI had kept key interest rate unchanged. It raised inflation forecast for remainder of the current financial year to 4.3-4.7 per cent, on account of global crude oil prices and implementation of the 7th Pay Commission recommendations. As per the government data released today, inflation in vegetables witnessed some softening at 56.46 per cent in December as against 59.80 per cent in the previous month. However, kitchen staple onion witnessed a whopping 197.05 per cent price rise in December, 2017. Inflation in protein rich eggs, meat and fish cooled to 1.67 per cent in December, while that in fruits spiked to 11.99 per cent. The rate of price rise in the manufactured goods category stood at 2.61 per cent. Meanwhile, inflation for October has been revised upwards to 3.68 per cent from the provisional estimate of 3.59 per cent released earlier.
New Delhi, January 15: As wholesale inflation eased to 3.58 per cent in December, India Inc on Monday urged the Reserve Bank to reduce key policy rates to augment investments and boost economic growth. As the inflation numbers are being driven largely on account of supply side factors, we urge the Reserve Bank of India to calibrate its monetary policy stance giving equal weightage to growth consideration. Lowering of the repo rate in the upcoming monetary policy is critical to boost investments and build the growth momentum at this juncture, Ficci President Rashesh Shah said. Inflation based on wholesale prices eased to 3.58 per cent in December 2017 as prices of food articles declined even as fuel cost witnessed a surge. The WPI inflation was 3.93 per cent in November 2017 and 2.10 per cent in December 2016. Assocham said inflation may remain high till April-June 2018, even as successive hardening of core inflation in last five months can be seen as a cause for concern. The policymakers need to take care of the continuous rise in petrol and high speed diesel prices due to rise in global crude oil prices which may have an impact on import bills and subsequent impact on exchange rates,said Assocham Secretary General D S Rawat. As per government data released today, inflation on food articles slowed to 4.72 per cent in December, from 6.06 per cent in November 2017. We also look forward to the Union Budget to provide details on more specific measures towards strengthening of agriculture supply chain for effective management of food prices. At the same time, we hope to see inclusion of petrol and diesel under GST in coming months, which should also help in lowering the pressures of fuel inflation, Shah said. Data released last week showed that retail inflation breached the RBI’s comfort level to touch 5.21 per cent in December on rise in prices of food items, especially vegetables. The RBI takes into account retail inflation while deciding on key policy rates. In its last policy review in December, RBI had kept key repo rate unchanged at 6 per cent and reverse repo rate at 5.75 per cent.
