New Delhi, January 16: Wholesale price-based inflation eased to a three-month low of 3.58% in December 2017 as food prices softened, prompting the industry to seek measures in Budget to strengthen agriculture supply chain. It was 3.93% in November 2017 and 2.10% in December 2016. Inflation on food articles slowed to 4.72% in December, from 6.06% in November 2017, the official data released today showed. In fuel and power segment, inflation rose to 9.16% in December against 8.82% in the previous month. Industry chamber Ficci said continued efforts of the government to strengthen food supply mechanism can help in bringing down food inflation further. We also look forward to the Budget to provide details on more specific measures towards strengthening of agriculture supply chain for effective management of food prices. We hope to see inclusion of petrol and diesel under GST in coming months, which should also help in lowering the pressures of fuel inflation, Ficci president Rashesh Shah said. ICRA Principal Economist Aditi Nayar said despite the sharp rise in crude oil prices in the current month, WPI inflation is expected in a range of 3.2-3.6% in the March quarter. Meanwhile, India Inc today urged the RBI to reduce key policy rates to augment investments and boost economic growth.As the inflation numbers are being driven largely on account of supply side factors, we urge the RBI to calibrate its monetary policy stance giving equal weightage to growth consideration. Lowering of the repo rate in the upcoming monetary policy is critical to boost investments and build the growth momentum at this juncture, Ficci president Rashesh Shah said.
New Delhi, January 16: As many as six more states, including Gujarat, Haryana and Bihar, today joined the government’s centralised e-way bill system for inter-state road transportation of goods in the GST regime, taking the total to 10. Under the GST, inter-state movement of goods beyond 10 km, with a value of Rs 50,000 and above, will mandatorily require e-way bill from February 1. Trial runs for e-way bill began today, GSTN said. Four states, namely Karnataka, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and Kerala, had already started using e-way bill. We had started e-way bill in four states earlier. Now we have started the trial run of e-way bill in six more states  Haryana, Bihar, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Sikkim and Jharkhand. Other states are also likely to join us soon in this initiative,said Prakash Kumar, CEO, GSTN.
