New Delhi, January 26: Halting two months of decline, the GST collections gathered momentum in December, rising to Rs 86,703 crore. Total revenue Collections under GST for the month of December 2017 (received in December 2017/January up to January 24, 2018) has been Rs 86,703 crores till January 24 2018, the Finance Ministry said in a tweet. Total collections under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) in November had slipped for the second straight month to Rs 80,808 crore, from over Rs 83,000 crore in October. In September, it was over Rs 92,150 crore The ministry further said that one crore taxpayers have been registered under GST till January 24, of which 17.11 lakh are composition dealers who are required to file returns every quarter. As many as 56.30 lakh GSTR 3B returns have been filed for December, it said. For the composition dealers, for the July-September quarter, the last date of filing GSTR 4 Return was December 24, it said. A total of 8.10 lakh returns were filed by them amounting to Rs 335.86 crore. For the October-December quarter, the last date for filing GSTR 4 return was January 18, and a total of 9.25 lakh returns were filed by composition dealers paying a sum of Rs 421.35 crore, it added.
Chandigarh, January 26: Having witnessed almost flat growth in the first nine months of the current fiscal due to market disruptions and introduction of GST, the bicycle industry expects some bold initiatives by the Finance Minister to boost the demand in domestic market and enhance exports. Currently, India produces 18 million bicycles per annum. Punjab accounts for 92% of the country’s bicycle parts production and 75% of bicycle production. The total turnover of the bicycle industry in Punjab is around Rs 5,000 crore with companies like Hero, Avon, TI and Neelam Cycles operating from the state. The industry has following expectations:In order to boost the exports, the government should increase duty drawback rates. This will give a fillip to the bicycle exports from the country,said Rishi Pahwa, joint MD, Avon Cycles, Ludhiana. Duty drawback compensates the exporters for the duties paid on inputs used to manufacture goods for export.Price of raw material Steel constitutes almost 85% of the raw material in bicycle manufacturing and in the past two-and-a-half months steel prices have risen by almost Rs 10,000 per tonne. The government’s decision to impose minimum import price on steel from China is hurting as the domestic steel producers are continuously increasing the prices and it is making us non-competitive in the domestic as well as export market. The Steel Regulatory Commission should be set up to regulate the prices, said Charanjit Singh Vishwakarma, former president, United Cycle and Parts Manufacturers Association (UCPMA).Protection from import
The duty-free import of cycle parts from Sri Lanka is hurting the domestic industry now. Earlier, the import of bicycle parts from China was hitting the industry. The parts manufactured in India should not be allowed to import, said a member of the UCPMA. According to the policy, members of the ASEAN and SAFTA), which includes developing and under-developed countries, can export their goods in India at zero per cent duty.Road infrastructure The industry has also demanded that the Ministry of Road and Urban Development should focus on infrastructure so that more people can opt for cycling.
