Any hopes of a revival of the economy will squarely rest on the outcome of the agricultural sector. Photo: Reuters2017 has been a bad year for the economy. The fact that the economy is in crisis, particularly the rural economy, is no longer a matter of statistics. The recent elections in Gujarat have laid bare the fissures in the rural economy that have been ignored for the last three-and-a-half years. With three of the major states ruled by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) facing elections this year, the ruling dispensation can hardly afford to take things lightly. There is already some discussion on designing better mechanisms for price support measures for farmers in Madhya Pradesh and other states ruled by the BJP. While the political exigencies may lead to support for the rural economy, there is in fact a strong economic case as well, if aggregate economic growth has to be revived.For most commentators, there is a sense of relief that the worst phase of the economy may be over. This belief partly stems from the fact that the overall economy has rebounded, reversing the deceleration in aggregate growth numbers. Most commentators also believe, erroneously, that the slowdown has been the result of demonetisation and the hurried rollout of the goods and services tax (GST) and with the economy slowly adjusting to these shocks, the economy may actually be on an upward trajectory. But this euphoria may not last long if the root cause of the deceleration is not tackled.It is worth reiterating that neither was the slowdown the result of demonetisation and GST rollout, nor is remonetization and the economy adjusting to GST a sign of recovery. The slowdown precedes both these shocks and the real reason is the crisis in the rural economy. There is a lot of evidence to support this, the most important being rural incomes and wages, both of which have been falling in real terms over a period of more than three years. The droughts and the sudden collapse of prices after August 2014 aggravated rural misery but the structural issues remain important and unattended to.It was the demand depression caused by rural distress that spilled over to the larger economy. Therefore, any attempt at reviving the economy has to begin with revival of the rural economy.Also Read: Economic policy challenges in 2018Unfortunately, there are no signs yet that the rural economy is reviving. The usual symptoms of distress have in fact worsened. The revival in rural wage rate growth was short-lived and rural wages are again stagnating. Prices of most crops remain under pressure and despite a good monsoon in the last two years, crop production remains subdued. Kharif output this year is expected to decline by 2.8%. According to a report released by the ministry of agriculture on 28 December, reservoir levels are 5 billion cubic metres lower than last year. Recent estimates of crop sowing released by the agriculture ministry suggest that even rabi sowing may be less than the previous year. As on 29 December, wheat sowing is 1.7 million hectares lower than corresponding estimates for the previous year, which is a decline of 6%. Sowing of coarse cereals is lower by 1.1% and sowing of oilseeds is lower by 6.7% as on 29 December.Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh are among major states which grow wheat and oilseeds and a large decline in area sown does not augur well for the already fragile agricultural economy in these states, both of which have seen agrarian unrest last year. The only crop which has seen an increase in acreage is pulses, which has seen its area rise by more than 8%. For rabi crops as a whole, the area sown is 1% lower than the previous year.While rabi sowing data suggests that the trend of decline in output of crop agriculture is likely to continue, it is the price volatility which is likely to add to the crisis in the countryside. So far, attempts to strengthen price support measures have not borne fruit. The challenge is not just the ability of the government to strengthen the existing framework of price support measures but also create a robust system where none exists. This is particularly true for horticultural crops where there is complete absence of any policy to deal with price volatility. Nor is there any effort to improve market access and remove cartelization in the supply chain. While the crisis in agriculture has worsened in the last three-and-a-half years, it continues to remain unattended. Available data from national accounts confirms that public investment in agriculture during this government’s first two years has declined in real terms by more than 4%.Any hopes of a revival of the economy will squarely rest on the outcome of the agricultural sector. The distress in rural economy, unfortunately, is not limited only to the agrarian sector but has also spilled over to the larger economy with unemployment becoming a major challenge. Contrary to popular perception, these are not separate problems but linked to each other. The only way to revive employment growth is a revival in the agrarian economy. It is also the only way to revive overall economic growth. It is also politically imperative for the incumbent government, if it has to seek political legitimacy. More than 80% of the decline in oilseeds is in Rajasthan and almost 40% of the decline in area under wheat is in Madhya Pradesh. Lest the government forget, it is important to remind it that no government has been re-elected by ignoring the agrarian sector. The Atal Bihari Vajpayee government learnt it the hard way. Let’s hope that this government learns from its predecessor.Himanshu is an associate professor at Jawaharlal Nehru University and visiting fellow at Centre de Sciences Humaines, New Delhi.
India’s exports grew at an average pace of 12% in the April-November 2017 period from a year earlier, slower than those of Vietnam and Indonesia, which grew at 24% and 16%, respectively. Photo:The past few months have witnessed a spirited recovery in global trade, with some estimates suggesting that the recovery will gather momentum in 2018. Despite this buoyancy in global trade, India’s export performance has been quite modest, especially when compared to other major Asian economies.As the chart below shows, several Asian economies have reported faster export growth than India.India’s exports grew at an average pace of 12% in the April-November 2017 period from a year earlier, slower than those of Vietnam and Indonesia, which grew at 24% and 16%, respectively.While India’s double-digit growth in exports marks an improvement over fiscal 2017 when exports grew at slightly above 5%, there are several worrying signs in the export data.The disaggregated exports data show that the rebound in India’s exports growth in the current fiscal year has been very uneven. Exports of two commodity-based sectors—petroleum products and iron and steel (and other metals)—have accounted for more than half of the export growth in the current fiscal year.The most worrying part about India’s export performance is the growing divergence between labour-intensive sectors and other sectors. As the chart below shows, the aggregate export growth in labour-intensive sectors—textiles, electronic goods, gems and jewellery, leather, and agricultural products—has remained anaemic even as overall exports growth has picked up pace in recent months.The chart suggests that a key engine of job creation in the Indian economy has been malfunctioning.The sluggish growth in labour-intensive exports comes at a time when global trade has picked up pace, and when currency levels have been relatively stable. This suggests that domestic developments such as the ham-handed implementation of the goods and services tax (GST) are to blame, wrote economists Dharmakirti Joshi, Adhish Verma, and Pankhuri Tandon of CRISIL in a recent note on exports. The economists argued that the implementation of GST and the associated glitches have hit the small and medium-scale enterprises the hardest, derailing growth in sectors such as textiles, gems and jewellery, and leather—where such enterprises dominate the supply chain.But they also pointed out that while the clumsy implementation of the GST may have exacerbated the woes of these sectors in recent months, these sectors have been losing competitiveness over a much longer stretch of time.What this suggests is that the real fix in reviving India’s export engine will lie in structural solutions involving ease of access to basic infrastructure such as roads, ports, and power as well as simplification of business regulations and labour laws. While a simpler GST structure would definitely help exporters, especially smaller enterprises, this needs to be followed up with more broad-ranging reforms.The Narendra Modi government’s ability to deliver on its promise of job creation before it faces general elections in 2019 will hinge crucially on how far it is able to facilitate a recovery in key labour-intensive industries.
Recovery in India’s GDP growth will likely be relatively gradual, preventing inflation from rebounding and allowing RBI to keep rates on hold for the time being. Photo: BloombergNew Delhi: India’s growth rate is expected to accelerate over the coming year and is likely to improve further to 7.6% by 2019-20 as key sectors would revive from disruptions related to the implementation of GST and demonetisation, says an HSBC report.According to the global financial services major, GDP growth in India is expected to accelerate to 7.0% in 2018-19 from 6.5% in this fiscal, shaking off the disruptions from demonetisation and introduction of the Goods and Services Tax (GST).“India’s growth story has a two-part narrative. The first is a slowdown and gradual recovery in the short run, likely over FY18 and FY19, as key sectors revive from disruptions related to the implementation of GST,” HSBC said in a research note. The subsequent narrative is of brighter growth prospects in the medium term (FY20 and beyond), when growth is expected to reap the benefits of recently undertaken structural reforms, it added.HSBC expects India’s growth at around 6.5% in 2017-18, 7.0% in 2018-19 and 7.6 in 2019-20, respectively. The report further said the recovery in India’s GDP growth will likely be relatively gradual, preventing price pressures from rebounding and allowing the Reserve Bank of India to keep rates on hold for the time being.According to HSBC, once the impact of transient factors wanes, inflation will settle around RBI’s 4% target. “We expect inflation to average 3.4% over FY18 (ending the year in March at 4.3%),” it said adding “accordingly, we forecast RBI will keep the repo rate on hold, as the rate-cutting cycle of the central bank looks set to have ended, with most inflation risks tilted to the upside”.The Reserve Bank in its fifth bi-monthly review of this fiscal kept repo rate unchanged at 6% and reverse repo at 5.75% while raising the inflation forecast for the remainder of 2017-18 to 4.3-4.7%.
Revenue at Titan’s jewellery business grew 15% during October-December 2016-17, i.e. Q3 2016-17. Photo: Preetha K./MintBengaluru: Titan Co. Ltd Tuesday said its main business segments—jewellery and watches—performed well in the October-December festive season quarter.Traditionally, September-December yields the largest revenue for Titan since both Dussehra and Diwali fall during this period and the festive season did not disappoint this year either, the company said in a filing with the BSE.The quarter started off on a good note for all jewellers after the government removed the industry from the purview of the reporting requirement under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) on 6 October.Under the earlier PMLA provisions, any sale of gold above Rs50,000 required customers to furnish PAN (permanent account number) or Aadhaar. The change in the provisions sparked a surge in sales at Titan’s flagship Tanishq jewellery stores just in time for the festive season, the company said.The jewellery segment—the largest revenue contributor—clocked double-digit retail growth over the festival dates in the previous year. The 2016-17 festive season, according to Titan, was one of the best in the company’s history with Dussehra and Diwali falling in the same quarter.Revenue at Titan’s jewellery business grew 15% during October-December 2016-17, i.e. Q3 2016-17.Although Dussehra was in September this year, retail growth in the jewellery segment has been healthy and in line with management expectations in Q3 2017-18, Titan said. But primary growth in the quarter was lower due to a higher franchisee billing of about Rs250 crore that happened towards the end of the previous quarter.Still, Tanishq continued to gain market share with special collections like ‘Padmavati,’ launched in association with the movie of the same name, performing exceptionally well in terms of sales. The company also launched a men’s jewellery sub-brand under Tanishq called ‘Aveer’ in the last quarter.Titan’s watches segment posted healthy same-store-sales growth in Q3 2017-18 across all retail formats and its end-of-season sale, which began towards the end of the quarter, is expected to boost sales further. The watches business also benefited from a regulatory change during the period, with the government lowering the goods and service tax (GST) rate on the category to 18% from 28%.The government also reduced the GST rate on sunglasses to 12% from 18% during the quarter and Titan’s watch and eye wear divisions have corrected prices accordingly. Still, the company’s sunglasses business continued to underperform as distributors and dealers remain wary about stocking the category due to changes in the GST rate. However, the prescription eye wear business continued to grow at a healthy pace, Titan said.
Of the country’s total demand for electronics, between 50-60% of the products and 70-80% of the components are imported. Illustration: Jayachandran/MintA growing middle class, rising disposable incomes, declining prices of electronics and a number of government initiatives have led to a fast-growing market for electronics and hardware products. However, India’s weak manufacturing base has not been able to respond to this increasing demand, leading to a growing trade deficit.Of the country’s total demand for electronics, between 50-60% of the products and 70-80% of the components are imported. India’s imports of electronic goods grew 31% between April and October 2017 to $29.8 billion. Meanwhile, the trade deficit reached close to $100 billion during the April-November period of 2017, against $67 billion in the same eight-month period a year ago.This is an ominous sign. If the situation doesn’t change, a report by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu states, expenses on electronics imports could surpass those on oil imports by 2020. Moreover, the industry has the potential to provide millions of jobs, directly and indirectly.In order to deal with the problem, the government has listed the electronics industry as a priority sector under its Make In India campaign. There are various government schemes to encourage domestic manufacturing which provide tax and tariff concessions, investment subsidies, preferential market access in government procurement and export subsidy. In fact, as recently as December, the government increased the import duty on various electronic items like smartphones, LED bulbs and microwave ovens—for most products, the rate increased from 10% to either 15% or 20%.But, as this paper has often argued, the way forward is to increase the country’s general competitiveness in the export market instead of pursuing sectoral policies. India’s share in the global electronics market was a minuscule 1.6% of the market in 2015 that is currently valued over $1.75 trillion. With a large domestic market and a number of trained engineers, India’s absence in the electronics manufacturing supply chain is an anomaly that better policies can correct. Instead of preserving our market for domestic manufacturers, the goal should be to capture a larger piece of this global market. There are various factors that have kept these goals from being met.First is the inverted tax structure for electronic goods. Due to a limited base of local component suppliers, manufacturers are dependent on importing parts. Under the World Trade Organisation’s information technology agreement of 1995 (ITA-1), tariffs on 217 IT products were set at zero. However, the positive custom duties on the components (or parts) used in electronic products make it expensive for domestic manufacturers to compete with foreign competitors who can access the components at lower prices. The solution is to bring the duties on components down to the level of the product. Some parts might be used for multiple products that may have different duties, but it’s important to rule in favour of simple rules and apply the rate-cut regardless of use. It’s not difficult to imagine a rule for assessing the eligibility for the duty-concession depending on the use to which a component is put—it is precisely this kind of paperwork that needs to be avoided.Second, foreign direct investment (FDI) in electronics is less than 1% of the total FDI inflow because of onerous labour laws, delays in land-acquisition and the uncertain tax regime have kept investors at bay. While the labour laws may be reformed in 2018, and we might be past the times of retrospective taxation, the memory of the Vodafone and Nokia cases is still fresh in investors’ memory. In order to inspire confidence, laws need to be liberal and predictable. In the case of taxation, it is important to clearly establish the tax liabilities under different circumstances in full detail. A possible experiment could be special economic zones like the Dubai International Financial Centre—Dubai’s normal civil and commercial laws do not apply in this area and a British chief justice ensures the practice of British common law.Third, the procedures for cross-border trade work against the competitiveness of Indian producers as shown by the Doing Business rankings—India ranks 146 in the category of trading across borders due to the high costs of compliance. The numerous forms, fees, inspections and the associated time discourage domestic producers from exporting and keep them out of the international supply chain.Between 2000 and 2015, hardware production in India increased from Rs31,100 crore to Rs1.02 trillion. Meanwhile, information technology (IT) services revenue increased from Rs37,750 crore to Rs8.4 trillion. This shows that India is capable of producing globally competitive products. But while the non-material nature of IT services has constrained the state’s grabbing hand, the electronics manufacturing industry did not have that privilege.China, with its rising labour costs, will soon not be the global manufacturing hub it is today. This is an opportunity for countries like India, the Philippines, Thailand, etc., to attract companies to move their plants to their country. Despite its low costs of labour, India might lose this race if it doesn’t reform the key sectors of the economy.This is not to suggest that the government is oblivious to these challenges. In fact, much has been done in the past couple of years to suggest that we are moving in the right direction. Introduction of the landmark goods and services tax (GST) has increased the distance that trucks are travelling by about 30%. GST has also reduced the confusion associated with various state and local taxes. And the government seems determined to improve the condition of highways and ports.Yet, much needs to be done towards removing barriers that discourage exports and creating a reputation for stable and predictable rules.How can India’s electronics manufacturing industry be made globally competitive? Tell us at views@livemint.com