The Indian economy recovered from its three-year low of 5.7% GDP growth in the June quarter to grow at 6.3% in the September quarter. Photo: MintNew Delhi: The Central Statistics Office (CSO) will release the first advance estimates of GDP growth for 2017-18 on Friday, a practice it started last year after the government shifted the presentation of the Union Budget to 1 February from end February.The government’s statistics wing will have data only for additional one or two months than what it had for its second quarter (July-September) GDP estimate to make the full-year GDP growth projection.Here are five things to watch out for in the first advance estimates of GDP data for 2017-18.Headline GDP numberThe Indian economy recovered from its three-year low of 5.7% GDP growth in the June quarter to grow at 6.3% in the September quarter. Thus, in the first half of 2017-18, the economy grew at 6%. Most economists have projected India’s GDP growth to remain in the range of 6.5-6.8% in 2017-18, given that the economy is yet to fully recover from the twin policy blow of demonetisation and hasty implementation of the goods and services tax (GST). The economy grew at 7.1% in 2016-17.Nominal GDPThe nominal GDP will be used as the benchmark for most indices in the 2018-19 budget to be presented by finance minister Arun Jaitley on 1 February. In Union Budget 2017, the finance ministry had assumed nominal GDP of Rs168.5 trillion at 11.75% growth rate. In a fiscally tight year, a lesser nominal GDP will make it that more difficult for the government to achieve the fiscal deficit target of 3.2% of GDP in 2017-18.Industrial growthAny recovery in GDP growth is expected on the back of improved industrial performance. However, the CSO will have factory output data for just one additional month of October for its full-year GDP projection compared to what it had till the second quarter (July-September). In the first seven months of the financial year, Index of Industrial Production (IIP) growth averaged 2.5%, a tad lower than the average of 2.6% in the first six months (April-September).However, there is a difference between the way manufacturing data is calculated in the GDP and the IIP. While GDP calculates the value addition in the manufacturing sector, IIP only calculates volume growth, thus making it difficult to compare the two sets of data.Government expenditureThe data will also reveal the role combined government expenditure (centre plus states) may play in boosting overall GDP growth. The central government’s public expenditure which used to be the driver of economic growth in the previous quarters slowed down to 6% in the September quarter. There seems to be front-loading of revenue expenditure as revenue deficit crossed 152% of the budget target.Data limitationsThe limited availability of data for the full-year projection is likely to be less accurate this time, given disruptive policy changes such as demonetisation and GST rollout. The second advance estimates to be released on 28 February, based on actual data for three quarters, and the provisional estimate to be released in May 2018 should give a better picture of the health of the economy. Also, the limitation in getting data for the trade sector after GST was implemented on 1 July, which CSO faced while estimating the September quarter data, may continue, affecting the accuracy of overall GDP data.The Nifty rose 0.59% to 10,504.80 points on Thursday, while the Sensex closed at 33,969.64 points, up 0.52%. Photo: HTMumbai: Foreign brokerages are forecasting around 10% gains for India’s benchmark indices in 2018, betting on a rebound in corporate earnings growth and economic recovery.On Wednesday, Deutsche Bank set its December Nifty target at 11,500 points, 9.5% higher than the current level. It also said that the implied Sensex target is 37,000 points. A day earlier, CLSA had raised its Nifty target for 2018 to 11,400 points.The Nifty rose 0.59% to 10,504.80 points on Thursday, while the Sensex closed at 33,969.64 points, up 0.52%. Both indices had gained around 28% in rupee terms in 2017.The “positivity is premised on the return of economic and earnings growth”, said Abhay Laijawala, head of equity research, Deutsche Bank’s India unit. “We have far more certainty that growth is going to be back. The return of rural purchasing power indicated that rural recovery may return to India after a gap of two-three years. This could significantly boost aggregate demand and eventually lead to higher capacity utilization rates, and this may help catalyse the investment cycle by the end of 2018.”According to Deutsche Bank, the Nifty will trade at 16.8 times expected earnings over the next 12 months at the end of December. That compares with the five-year average forward multiple of 15.4 times.CLSA’s target is also based on an earnings recovery.“We expect the earnings trajectory to improve meaningfully this year with disruptive changes like demonetisation and GST (goods and services tax) implementation behind us and as a solid foundation for long-term improvement in economic growth rates and corporate profitability has been laid,” said CLSA.Others are more optimistic. IDFC Securities, for instance, forecasts that the Nifty will hit 11,300 points by the end of March because 2017 has been a year of structural reforms such as the GST, increased focus on digitization and fiscal stimulus,recapitalization of state-run banks and the Bharatmala highway-building programme.“We believe these initiatives will address key issues (non-performing assets leading to weak credit offtake, weakness in small and medium enterprises segment and manufacturing) plaguing the Indian economy in the last few years,” IDFC Securities said.Others were more sober, pointing to rich valuations and fears of higher inflation, which may derail public finances and the stock market rally.In a 29 December note, Kotak Institutional Equities said that a large part of the earnings recovery may be largely discounted by current high valuations.The market’s performance in calendar year 2018 will largely depend on fiscal year 2019’s (expected) earnings being met and continued confidence in the following fiscal year’s earnings as domestic and global macro-environment factors may be less favourable, wrote Kotak analysts.In any case, analysts seemed to agree on one thing. The record low volatility in 2017 is a thing of the past.“With growth coming back, there is a risk that inflation could be higher than last year. Bond yields, could remain elevated,” said Laijawala of Deutsche.
We are told by election pundits that the traders in Surat decided to vote for the BJP in Gujarat despite their initial distress with GST’s structuring because the government at the Centre relaxed the voucher-based filing frequency for small traders. Photo: PTIAn electoral battle in a constituent state of a federal system is supposed to be fought on policies and issues falling within the functional domain of states. Members of the legislative assembly (MLAs) are expected to seek re-election on their record in terms of what they promised to deliver when they got voted in. All MLAs have a local area fund entirely under their control. They can speak of the uses to which they put their MLA fund. They can contrast that with constituencies which made the mistake of electing MLAs from other parties.If a member is on a weak wicket in terms of his personal record, he may then take recourse to asking the state-level leadership of his party to come to his aid. The state leader can trumpet the achievements of the government at state level, speaking, say, of the reduction of maternal mortality achieved, and telling women in the audience that they have a higher probability of surviving childbirth if they vote back the party to power, thus shifting attention from the individual MLA to his party affiliation, and urging them to vote him back so as to get the majority they need to form the next government and continue the downward path of maternal mortality.The party in power at the Centre should ordinarily be of no relevance. But this is not the way the two December state elections, or any of the prior state elections, were fought. Political parties have become brands, like Lux versus Lifebuoy. That, in turn, has turned every state election into national entertainment, deflecting attention from issues that critically matter for people everywhere in the country which can only find redressal at state or local level—like agricultural distress, air and water pollution, or road congestion, safety in public places, or public health scourges like dengue and chikungunya and encephalitis.Yes, agriculture (a state subject) did loom large as an issue in the Gujarat elections, but even that was fought on a brand basis. Both brands claimed they had the interests of farmers at heart. Even though many policy levers, even for a state subject like agriculture, are controlled at the Centre, this shift in attention to the Centre benefited no one. The elections just became a way by which farmers in south Gujarat could send a distress signal by shifting to another brand. They needed candidates who could tell them the specifics of what could be done by the state to address both their immediate as well as their long-term concerns. The only state-level issues not fought on a brand basis were the Patidar agitation (sectarian), and the Dalit agitation (not sectarian albeit caste-based, centred around non-delivery on past promises).More theatres of warfare between the two major political parties are in the offing in 2018. Eight states are up for elections, each threatening to become a referendum on policies at the Centre. We need to think seriously about synchronizing state and national elections, so that voter choices at state level are made without knowing which party will form the government at the Centre. One would have thought that political parties, burdened as they are with the problem of finding funding, would favour synchronized elections. Democracy is one of our strengths, and in a country as large as India, there is indeed no other basis on which it can be run. However, we need a rethink on how to restructure the electoral system so as to give the voter a voice, rather than, as presently, take it away.The Chinese success in delivering to its people without electoral democracy has generated a serious empirical investigation of whether democracy facilitates growth, by a team headed by Daron Acemoglu, a prominent economist. The paper, ‘Democracy does cause growth’, currently in circulation as a working paper and to be published this year, concludes that democracy is indeed growth-promoting, from a cross-country study covering 1960-2010. The paper is really an investigation of transitions from non-democracy to democracy, and so in a sense does not quite capture countries like India which had already made that transition by 1960 (and fortunately did not transition out), but the channels through which democracy ramps up growth are instructive.These include state and local issues like quality and reach of schooling (implicitly coupled to child nutrition programmes), and public goods benefiting all, such as sanitation and transportation networks. Others, like structural reform leading to greater efficiency in the system, clearly need doing at the national level. Some, like agriculture, are state subjects, but can be driven by national initiatives.A national-level reform which was justified as an issue in the Gujarat elections, as indeed it will be everywhere because it reaches so deeply into the structuring of the Indian economic machine, is the goods and services tax (GST). We are told by election pundits that the traders in Surat decided to vote for the Bharatiya Janata Party in Gujarat despite their initial distress with the structuring of the GST because the government at the Centre heard them and relaxed the voucher-based filing frequency for small traders. But now that the average monthly revenue collection over the July-September quarter of Rs0.93 trillion has fallen to Rs0.83 trillion in October, and further to Rs0.81 trillion in November, a rethink is under way on some of the other design changes that have been made in recent months to the GST, with the prospect of partial or full rollback. The big revenue drop happened in October.The revenue decline is indeed a serious matter, but the possible causes need to be disentangled so as to advance the GST story rather than set it back further. With the exception of those on the composition scheme, the revenue due for any month is currently payable by the 20th of the succeeding month through form GSTR 3B, an unverified interim summary of tax collected net of taxes paid. This is then adjusted to the detailed voucher-specific information called for in forms GSTR 1 (outward supplies) and GSTR 2 (inward supplies), whose deadlines come later.The information in GSTR 1 is supposed to “populate” the voucher-based claims in GSTR 2 by the buyer, and if a claim is not verified in that way, the input tax credit (ITC) claim of the buyer is denied. But since the deadlines for these kept getting extended on account of non-compliance, there has been constant revision of revenue collections for earlier months. A recent extension up to 10 January 2018 for the period July to October means that even the July figure remains provisional.The shift in the filing frequency, already alluded to in connection with Surat traders in the Gujarat elections, from monthly to quarterly for small traders was made in early October. The shift in the filing frequency already alluded to from monthly to quarterly for small traders was made in early October. That may have been what revised September collections up to the highest monthly record so far—Rs0.95 trillion, on account of denied ITC claims made in the interim submission, and this will most likely happen in the last month of every forthcoming quarter.In mid-November, deadlines for filing of GSTR 1 were further extended, but deadlines for GSTR 2 were not prescribed, for the remainder of the current financial year. In effect, voucher matching as a prerequisite for honouring input credit claims stood temporarily suspended.This move away from voucher matching is thought to have been what caused the revenue decline in October, since it became effective in mid-November before the submission deadline of 20 November for GSTR 3B for October. According to reports, this might well lead to GSTR 2 being brought back, with thereby a return to universal voucher matching.My opinion has consistently been that voucher matching is needed only for transactions involving integrated GST (IGST), because cross-state sales are the most promising avenue for fraud (and were, even in the earlier state value-added tax system). A full rollback to universal voucher matching will generate the widespread frustrations over denied (although perfectly valid) input tax credit claims, and with that, a return to the hostility towards GST which had abated somewhat since November.The other change effective mid-November was a major round of rate reductions, leaving very few products at the topmost rate of 28%. The further fall in revenue by Rs0.02 trillion in November relative to October may well have resulted from those, but because it happened mid-month, there was no time for the demand response to the rate cut to show up. The demand impact could well show up as early as December.Also on the anvil are e-way bills as a way to combat fraud, of the inter-state variety. There is also every prospect that the reverse charge mechanism (RCM) will be brought back, whereby buyers forward tax payable on inward supplies from outside the formal GST net (composition or unregistered), and lodge a simultaneous credit claim on it. The RCM will be resented for the additional compliance burden, but will probably not be harmful in terms of economic activity. The e-way bill, on the other hand, could seriously reverse a major efficiency benefit reaped under the GST, which is free movement of goods without checks at state borders.What the council will do in response to the October-November revenue decline will have an impact on the forthcoming state elections. The need to combat fraud is real, but the best way to do this while still retaining the essential attribute of value-added taxation—upfront honouring of input tax claims—will be to confine voucher matching to IGST transactions. All other tax credit claims can be honoured as self-reported, with auditing checks on a sample basis. It is inter-state flows, encompassing exports out of the country, where the opportunities for fraud are greatest, which need to be curbed through a within-system cross-check of IGST payments. As for the rate reductions, any reversal would set back the long-term goal of the GST, which is to have a low rate of levy on a wide transactions base.
Indira Rajaraman is an economist.Recent indicators of exports, core sector data and the Manufacturing PMI, indicate an economic recovery is underway. Photo: MintThe lingering impact of demonetisation and implementation of the goods and services tax (GST) defined economic discourse in India in 2017.A 30-notch jump up the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business ranking to 100 among 190 countries and a much-awaited sovereign credit rating upgrade by Moody’s Investors Service confirmed the reform credentials of the Narendra Modi government like nothing else did.Modi invalidated Rs1,000 and Rs500 banknotes in November 2016, pulling out 86% of currency in circulation by value, but it was in the early part of 2017 that the effect of the move on demand, prices and jobs was truly felt.And coming eight months after the note ban, GST—touted as the biggest tax reform in India since independence—caused much disruption, with small and medium enterprises and exporters weighed down by the burden of complex filing procedures and delays in securing tax refunds.The government is still struggling to streamline the GST processes.The two consecutive disruptions brought down economic growth to a three-year low of 5.7% in the June quarter.Growth accelerated to 6.3% in the September quarter, thanks to restocking by companies that had cut inventory in the run-up to GST.The enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) entitled creditors to drag defaulters to the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) for time-bound resolution of bad debt.With a host of loan default cases referred by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to commercial banks for start of bankruptcy proceedings, the efficacy of the system will be tested in the coming months.If 2017 was the year of disruption, the government will be hoping that 2018 shapes up as a year of consolidation.Most analysts expect economic growth to pick up in 2018, helped by a global recovery and a domestic manufacturing rebound.RBI expects growth, measured by gross value added (GVA), to pick up to 7% in the December 2017 quarter and 7.8% in the March quarter.Recent indicators of exports, core sector data and the manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index, indicate an economic recovery is underway.At least two risks could derail the recovery.First, rising crude oil prices. India was a major beneficiary of a sharp fall in oil prices starting in 2014 to $28 per barrel in 2016.Price of Brent crude oil rose 18% in 2017 to $67.02 per barrel in December, a 30-month high. While higher fuel prices are likely to inflate input costs, exerting pressure on the margins of manufacturing companies, it will also widen the fiscal and current account deficits.The immediate worry is its inflationary impact. Retail inflation surged to a 15-month high of 4.9% in November from 3.6% in October after remaining below 4% for 12 consecutive months.Most economists believe RBI will keep its policy rates unchanged, but don’t rule out a rate hike if retail inflation remains above 5% for two consecutive quarters in 2018.Secondly, the deteriorating fiscal situation. While rising crude oil prices will inflate the government’s subsidy bill, a drop in indirect tax collections after implementation of GST and lower non-tax revenue may make it almost impossible to achieve the fiscal deficit target of 3.2% of gross domestic product (GDP) for 2017-18.The latest data showed that the government’s fiscal deficit reached 112% of the full-year target during April-November 2017.On top of it, the government has been expanding its spending and decided to borrow Rs50,000 crore more through long-term bonds. Most analysts expect the next budget for 2018-19 to be presented on 1 February to be a populist budget, it being the last full budget of the Modi government ahead of the 2019 general election.Rural distress has emerged as a common theme across the country, leading to many farmers’s protests and demands for farm loan waivers.Finance minister Arun Jaitley has indicated that the focus of the next budget will be on the rural economy and infrastructure.The government runs the risk of marring its record of fiscal prudence in four successive annual budgets if it opts for aggressive spending in its last year in office.But the real challenge before the government will be to sustain the pace of structural reforms during the final leg of its term.Public sector banking consolidation, privatization of Air India, more reforms in land and labour laws and agriculture are issues that cannot be postponed.Administrative reforms, on which the government has delivered little despite its promise of “minimum government, maximum governance”, need immediate attention.How the government handles the risks and utilizes the opportunities that 2018 will bring may well define its future.