Hindustan Unilever’s confidence is visible in the step-up in advertising expenses, which rose as a percentage of sales sequentially. Graphic: Subrata Jana/MintWith so much noise in Hindustan Unilever Ltd’s (HUL’s) results, it is better to step back and see the big picture. The company management says demand is recovering, but still maintains a cautious stance, saying give it a quarter or more before one can call it a trend. That may seem overcautious from an investor’s standpoint. The worst was behind us in the September quarter, and the December quarter results give no reason to turn sceptical.Now, HUL’s 11% volume growth indeed has a base-induced bump due to demonetisation in the year-ago quarter. Still, the September quarter volumes rose by 5% compared to a 1% decline a year ago. And the December quarter’s 11% growth is off a base of a 4% decline. While both are not comparable, it does appear as if growth has strengthened. It is natural to expect volume growth to settle down in subsequent quarters.The 17% underlying domestic consumer business growth came despite price cuts after the government cut GST (goods and services tax) rates from 28% to 18% on several fast-moving consumer goods. HUL’s financials show that its input costs as a percentage of sales declined sequentially. Although crude oil-related input costs may have turned expensive, it does not seem to have affected the company yet. This could also be attributable to a better mix.HUL’s confidence is visible in the step-up in advertising expenses, which rose as a percentage of sales sequentially. That and higher employee costs and other expenses contributed to a slight decline in its Ebitda (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization) margin sequentially, falling by 69 basis points to 19.6%. Since the year-ago quarter’s profit after tax but before exceptional items fell by 15.8%, the December 2017 quarter’s 52.2% growth should be seen in that light.The company’s volume growth will settle down to more normal rates in the coming quarters, although mid-FY19 will again see some base effect-linked volatility due to GST. Even if HUL’s steady-state volume growth settles in the 5-7% range, that will take it back to levels it last saw in FY16. That is a good start. Overall, expectations are that FY19 will see the economy recover and the government will take steps to give a boost to the rural economy. That could lead to a recovery in rural consumption, which should benefit the likes of HUL.The company’s shares have risen by a fifth over six months ago as investors have been expecting the recovery, visible in its results. HUL’s shares have also done much better than peer ITC Ltd, which has been weighed down by a high tax burden and an unfavourable policy environment. HUL is just a short burst away from overtaking ITC in the market, an indication of how its fortunes have changed for the better.
There are around 10 states where GST e-way bills are already being used. Graphic: Subrata Jana/MintThe future is here, but it is much inspired by the past, a case in point being the e-way bill.The nationwide e-way bill system, rolled out on 16 January on a trial basis, will help businesses and transporters to get a hang of the new mechanism that becomes mandatory in a fortnight.From 1 February 2018, all interstate movement of goods worth more than Rs50,000 will require securing an e-way bill through prior online registration of the consignment. The e-way bills system for intra-state movement of goods will be implemented from 1 June 2018.Wary of declining goods and services tax (GST) revenues, the government hopes to plug tax leakages by implementing the e-way bill system. It’s a concept that is unique to India. Globally, businesses continue to rely on an invoice for transporting goods, which is mostly in an electronic format. This invoice, issued by the seller, acts as proof of sale and the transporter is required to carry a copy of it, say tax experts.In India, an e-way bill was being used by businesses even in the pre-GST era. In fact, way-bill/entry tax as it was earlier called has been in existence in certain states for over two decades now, i.e., from the days of service tax and value-added tax (VAT).According to tax experts, the way-bill was issued by VAT authorities in the form of a printed booklet only to those businesses/dealers who were regular taxpayers. However, manual issuance of way-bill booklets resulted in harassment by tax authorities and boosted corruption, so a few years ago states like Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh computerized it. That is how the way-bill became electronic.There are around 10 states where e-way bills are already being used. In fact, e-way bills have been given different names in different states. “For instance, it is called e-sugam in Karnataka, e-Transit pass in Uttarakhand, e-Road Permit in Jharkhand and Bihar, Challan Inward/Outward in Sikkim. In the Union territory of Puducherry, e-way bill will be introduced for the first time,” said Archit Gupta, founder and chief executive officer of ClearTax, an online tax services firm. Under GST it will have a uniform name and format, but the original concept has been modified.For instance, the e-way bill will be valid for a specific time only, unlike in the erstwhile tax regime. Another differentiating factor is that a seller can issue bulk e-way bills in case of multiple consignments worth more than the threshold, which was a tedious task in the VAT regime.A key positive is that businesses will now have to deal with a standardized e-way bill form for transporting goods across the country, unlike in the earlier system where different forms had to be filled for transporting goods to different states. What remains unchanged is the objective—keeping a check on tax evasion by tracking the movement of goods.Some tax experts say the government could have devised a better technique to check revenue leakages instead of burdening the entire system with these e-way bills, which they fear may act as a hindrance to the seamless movement of goods.
The Maharashtra govt inks a memorandum with Israeli firm Mekorot to interlink major dams in Marathwada region. Photo: HT60%What is it? The percentage amount by which the Indian government has cut its additional borrowing requirement, from Rs50,000 crore to Rs20,000 crore, for the current fiscal, the finance ministry said on Wednesday.Why is it important? Markets cheered the news that the government may be able to contain fiscal slippage in 2017-18. The government’s December announcement that it plans to borrow an additional Rs50,000 crore prompted analysts to expect the fiscal deficit to breach its target of 3.2% of the GDP (gross domestic product) and reach 3.5%. Fiscal slippage concerns arose after revenue collections from GST (goods and services tax) was lower than expected, one of the main reasons for the government’s additional borrowing.Tell me more: After the additional borrowing decision last month, the total government borrowings for the current year were pegged at Rs6.3 trillion and Wednesday’s announcement brought it down to Rs6 trillion.1:10What is it? The ratio of people who feel lonely in the United Kingdom.Why is it important? In an interesting development, Britain has appointed sports minister Tracey Crouch to also take on the role of tackling loneliness among its citizens, in a bid to take forward the work started by murdered lawmaker Jo Cox. Loneliness is increasingly becoming a growing concern across the world, so much so that it is also seen having a huge impact on people’s health. According to the Campaign to End Loneliness, over half the people in the UK over 75 live alone and two-fifths of all older people say television is their main company.Tell me more: According to a 2017 study by Agewell Foundation, 43 out of 100 elderly people in India are victims of psychological problems that arise out of loneliness and other relationship issues.Rs10,000 croreWhat is it? The total cost of a project that aims to interlink major dams in Marathwada region, as per a memorandum of understanding signed by the Maharashtra government with Israeli firm Mekorot Development and Enterprise, ahead of Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s visit to Mumbai on Thursday.Why is it important? Marathwada, one of the regions worst affected by drought in the state, is battling another episode of water scarcity, where 41% of its villages have reported “paisewari” (meaning: the value of the actual yield after harvest in relation to the value of crops grown) below 50 paise. Different factors of agrarian crisis led to 970 farmers ending their lives in 2017.Tell me more: Mekorot will offer its expertise in development of technologies that plug the loss of water due to evaporation and lopsided distribution of water due to inconsistent rainfall or irregular distribution of rainfall in the catchment areas of dams.23What is it? Indian batsman Cheteshwar Pujara became only the 23rd batsman in the history of test cricket, and the first Indian, to be run out in both innings of a test match.Why is it important? Pujara’s dubious distinction was part of a fragile Indian batting performance that on Wednesday wilted to South African debutant Lungi Ngidi, and lost the second test match to South Africa by 135 runs. With this win, South Africa holds an unassailable 2-0 lead in the three-match test series against India. And India’s quest for its first series win in South Africa is now at 26 years and seven test series, and counting.Tell me more: In the list of 23 batsmen who have been run out in both innings, two Australians have suffered this ignominy twice: Mark Taylor and Ian Healy.75What is it? The number of engineers at ride-hailing firm Grab’s research centre in Bengaluru, which opened in March 2017. Most of them were working on GrabPay, the company’s payments platform.Why is it important? On Wednesday, Grab announced it had acquired iKaaz, a Bengaluru-based digital payments startup, though it did not disclose the deal value. The iKaaz team will join Grab’s research centre. iKaaz, founded in 2012, has several products, including a cloud-based platform for online sellers, point-of-sale hardware for retail merchants and a mobile wallet solution.Tell me more: While Grab does not offer ride-hailing services in India, it operates in several Southeast Asian markets, including Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand. It was last valued at $6 billion.howindialives.com is a search engine for public dataThe projection is a tad lower than 7.4% growth estimated by Asian Development Bank (ADB) and International Monetary Fund (IMF) for next fiscal. Photo: MintNew Delhi: India Ratings and Research on Thursday projected the country’s economic growth to improve to 7.1% next fiscal from 6.5% this year, buoyed by robust consumption demand and low commodity prices.In its outlook for 2018-19, the agency said there will be a gradual pick up in growth momentum owing to structural reforms like goods and service tax (GST) and Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) in place.“While the implementation of GST is likely to benefit the economy over the medium to long term, the same cannot be said about the impact of demonetisation,” India Ratings & Research (Ind-Ra), a subsidiary of Fitch Ratings, said.The agency expects gross domestic product (GDP) to grow 7.1% year-on-year in 2018-19, it said. The projection is a tad lower than 7.4% growth estimated by Asian Development Bank (ADB) and International Monetary Fund (IMF) for next fiscal. India Ratings said but for demonetisation and GST implementation, growth would not have decelerated to 7.1% in 2016-17 and 6.5% in 2017-18.With the global crude prices firming up, the rating agency expects retail and wholesale inflation to come in at 4.6% and 4.4%, respectively in 2018-19, indicating an end to the current rate cut cycle. There is still some fuzziness with respect to the intensity and the level of its future trajectory, it said, adding that the RBI “will remain in a pause mode for an extended period of time”.The agency said it expects fiscal deficit in 2017-18 to come in at 3.5%, overshooting the budgeted estimate of 3.2%. “Despite 2018-19 being a pre-election year, Ind-Ra does not expect the Union Budget to be a populist budget. However, it expects some expenditure reallocation with an increased focus on the rural and agriculture sectors,” it said.The agency expects fiscal deficit in 2018-19 to be at 3.2%, higher than 3% stated in the medium-term fiscal policy statement. A mix of global and domestic factors will keep the Indian rupee range bound at average Rs66.06 per US dollar in 2018-19, it said.