Bharti Realty currently has around 15 completed projects, having 5 million sq ft of fully leased Grade-A commercial space, in Delhi-NCR and some other cities. Photo: MintNew Delhi: Bharti Enterprises’ real estate firm Bharti Realty plans to invest about Rs3,500 crore to develop one commercial and a housing project in Delhi-NCR, a top company official said. The company sees big shift in demand towards organised real estate developers post introduction of new real estate law RERA and GST, Bharti Realty MD and CEO S K Sayal said.Bharti Realty currently has around 15 completed projects, having 5 million sq ft of fully leased Grade-A commercial space, in Delhi-NCR and some other cities, while 1 million sq ft of office building is nearing completion in Gurgaon. “We have bagged a project from Delhi International Airport Ltd (DIAL) to develop a commercial property which will have about 2.5 million sq ft of leasable area, mostly retail,” Sayal told PTI.The company will soon start development of this 23 acre of land parcel and targets to complete it in next four years, he added. Asked about the project cost, Sayal said this retail real estate project, one of the biggest in Delhi-NCR, will be developed with an investment of about Rs1,500 crore.In January last year, DIAL—which operates the aerodrome in the national capital—had given the contract to Bharti Realty to develop an area of nearly 2 lakh sq metres of retail space near the airport here. This contract, decided through bidding process, involved an upfront payment of Rs315 crore as well as license fee equivalent to 20% of revenue with minimum guaranteed payments, GMR had said last year.DIAL is a subsidiary of GMR Infrastructure. Bharti Realty already has 2-3 properties in commercial hub ‘Aerocity’ near Delhi airport. Asked about residential business, Sayal said the company had tied up with Eros Group to enter into housing sector. “We entered into a joint venture with Eros to develop a housing project on 52 acre land at Surajkund in Haryana. We have got all government approvals to develop this project,” he said, adding the construction work would begin soon.This project, comprising 2,300 units and 5 million sq ft development, would be completed over the next seven years with a cost of around Rs2,000 crore, Sayal said. The housing project at Surajkund will be vertical smart city where apartment price will be in the range of Rs1.25 crore to Rs4 crore. The two projects would require a total investment of about Rs3,500 crore and the same would be funded through internal accruals and bank loans.Sayal asserted that the company follows right business practices and therefore was unaffected by the real estate law RERA, GST and demonetisation. “We see demand shifting from unorganised developers to big organised players like us,” he said. Sayal said the company would continue to focus on the national capital region market. The Bharti Group has presence in telecom, agri-business, financial services, retail and real estate among others.
Operating profit margins of the 103 BSE-listed firms reviewed, however, were flat at 29.97% during the quarter, against 29.86% in the preceding quarter. Photo: PTIEarly trends in December quarter corporate earnings indicate a revival in business growth following a downturn in the aftermath of the November 2016 invalidation of high-value banknotes and the July 2017 implementation of the goods and services tax (GST).A review of earnings reported so far suggests the return of demand although it is too early to conclude if disruptions from the implementation of the GST have fully faded.According to data provider Capitaline, growth in net profit after adjustment for one-time items of 103 BSE-listed firms which have reported earnings so far jumped to a 13-quarter high, rising 23.02% year-on-year in the December quarter of FY18, against 4.92% in the preceding three months.Operating profit margins of these firms, however, were flat at 29.97% during the quarter, against 29.86% in the preceding quarter. Raw materials cost for the same set of companies rose 12.5% in the December quarter compared to the preceding quarter as Brent crude prices rose 16.21% in the October-December period.The earnings review excludes banks, financial services companies and oil and gas companies.There were expectations that the earnings recovery will gain momentum during the quarter due to last year’s low base caused by demonetization and the fading impact of GST-led disruptions.Teena Virmani, vice-president (research), Kotak Securities Ltd, said earnings so far have been better than estimates, led by demand improvement and the benefit of last year’s low base. “Post the GST rate changes incorporated in the month of November, demand started witnessing improvement in double digits in most consumer-related segment. Also, sequentially, the results in Q2FY18 were impacted by monsoon as well as GST implementation. The recovery in demand has been witnessed post Q2FY18 contributing to earnings in Q3, though prices have declined sequentially due to GST rate changes,” she added.Pankaj Pandey, head of research at ICICI Securities Ltd, said the effects of demonetization are fading. Businesses are not feeling the impact of it anymore and the transition to the new indirect tax system under GST is almost over.“Earnings have been more or less in line with expectations. We were expecting double digit growth for domestic-oriented sectors. There is a consumer demand pick-up which led to it. Commercial vehicles sales data is a good economic lead indicator and data for last month suggest an increase in consumer demand,” he added.Rural consumption suffered in the last two years due to several disruptive changes in the economy, such as demonetization and GST, apart from two consecutive droughts in 2014 and 2015. Analysts say that two consecutive years of good monsoon rainfall in 2016 and 2017, farm loan waivers, a recovery in real rural wage growth and post-GST normalization of the supply chain will drive rural consumption now“We believe that the government would allocate higher spend for rural and agriculture segments ahead of 2019 general elections. The Q2FY18 commentary, as well as our recent interaction with companies in the FMCG (fast-moving consumer goods), auto, durables and NBFC (non-banking financial company) sectors in November and December 2017, confirms the bottoming out of rural consumption,” wrote Motilal Oswal Securities Ltd in a note.The brokerage firm expects consumption recovery to gather steam in calendar 2018. Firms in consumption-oriented sectors will see earnings pick up strongly in the second half of 2017-18 and beyond.Despite widespread optimism and equity markets touching record highs, fundamentals are still weak. Bloomberg data shows Sensex firms’ consensus earnings per share forecast for the current fiscal has been cut by 11.3% since April; for 2018-19, it has been cut by 4.8%. The 30-share Sensex now trades at 20.71 times 12-month forward earnings, making it one of the costliest benchmark gauges.Though Indian markets are expensive, with continuous earnings downgrades, foreign investors have remained invested in domestic shares. So far this year, foreign institutional investors have bought Indian shares worth $822.50 million, while domestic institutional investors, including mutual fund and insurance companies, have pumped in Rs748.02 crore.
Only 15% of the used car market operates from organized dealerships, according to a study conducted by Mahindra and Mahindra. Photo: BloombergNew Delhi: The decision to reduce tax and remove cess on the sale of used vehicles is expected to boost the pre-owned car market, industry executives said.The GST Council on 18 January decided to reduce the goods and services tax (GST) on used cars to 12% and 18% (depending on the size of the vehicle) from the existing 28%, and scrap the cess (varying from 1-15%). The new rates will be applicable from 25 January.Under GST, tax and cess on new and old vehicles were the same—28% GST plus 1-3% cess on small or compact cars, and 28% GST and 15% cess on medium and bigger cars or sports utility vehicles (SUVs). These were levied on the profit margin of the used car dealers, putting sales volumes under pressure and made their business unviable.The segment had already been under pressure since demonetization in November 2016. Only 15% of the used car market operates from organized dealerships, according to a study conducted by Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd.According to Nagendra Palle, managing director and CEO at used car seller Mahindra First Choice Wheels, due to the high GST on larger vehicles, the sales of those vehicles fell by 25%.“A very positive move, relative to what it was before the change. Prior to this change, the effective GST rate was in the range of 29% to 53% on the gross margin including mandatory cess. At these tax rates, the organized used car business was challenged and would have been negative for the entire industry. The reduction in the base GST rate and removal of cess is a very welcome change and should provide impetus to growing the industry and especially to the organized sector,” explained Palle.According to the ‘India Pre-owned Car Market Report 2017’ published by Mahindra and Mahindra in September 2017, almost 70% of the all vehicles sold in the used car market are small cars priced under Rs4 lakh. The reduction of tax is expected to help the sector.According to a research done by CarDekho, one of the leading digital platforms for buying and selling second-hand vehicles, the used cars business should grow from $18 billion to $60 billion in the next five years.“Removal of cess, according to us, is a great initiative since it has decreased the tax rate incidence from pre-GST era. This will definitely outpace the new car industry growth rate and carve the perfect opportunity for used cars to grow as a segment,” said Rajat Sahni, CEO, used cars, CarDekho.“I am glad that the government acknowledged that the tax structure around the used vehicle category has to be different from new vehicle category and removal of cess is a welcome change. Secondly, whether you own the inventory of used vehicles or not, as a seller, one uniform 18% GST structure is a clear simplification of taxes,” said Sandeep Aggarwal, founder and CEO of Droom, an online market place to buy and sell used cars.According to Abhishek Jain, partner and tax expert at consulting firm EY, a used car is already taxed when it is sold for the first time and to levy the same tax rate on it as on a new car does not make any sense.“A used car dealer is paying the same amount of tax levied on a new car on his profit margin. This was killing the used car market. It is good that the government has taken note of this and decided to reduce the taxes. This will make the business more viable,” said Jain.
Fund managers also bought HDFC Bank Ltd shares worth Rs1,049 crore, and ICICI Bank Ltd shares worth Rs436 crore in December. Photo: MintMumbai: Mutual funds (MFs) stocked up on bank stocks in December in the large cap segment, as fund managers expecting long-term growth in Asia’s third largest economy continued to place bets on lenders.Punjab National Bank was the most bought large cap stock by domestic fund managers, as the country’s second largest state-run lender raised Rs5,000 crore in a share sale to institutional investors. Asset managers bought Rs1,192 crore of the stock in December, data from Morningstar showed.“Financials have always been in favour with fund houses and are their largest holdings, particularly top banks—HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank and State Bank of India,” said Kaustubh Belapurkar, director of fund research at Morningstar Investment Adviser India Pvt. Ltd.“While recent GDP estimates have been pointing to a slowdown due to initial hiccups on reforms implementation, the long-term economic growth story is very promising,” added Belapurkar.Earlier this month, India’s statistics office projected the economy to slow to 6.5% in 2017-18 from 7.1% a year ago. The economy has been hurt by the lingering impact of demonetisation and disruptions caused by GST.However, World Bank’s Global Economic Prospects report released after this data said that after conceding its position as the fastest growing major economy to China for a year in 2017, India is likely to reclaim the position in 2018, with growth expected to accelerate to 7.3% in the year.Fund managers also bought HDFC Bank Ltd shares worth Rs1,049 crore, and ICICI Bank Ltd shares worth Rs436 crore in the month.That was the common view.“There is a certainty that economy is on a recovery path. The high frequency data has been promising. Corporate lenders and infra firms have been high on fund managers’ radar,” said Gopal Agrawal, chief investment officer (equities) at Tata Asset Management Co Ltd.Engineering and construction firm Larsen & Toubro Ltd was the second-most bought stock by mutual funds in December, as they purchased Rs1,083 crore of the stock in the month.“Fresh NPA (non-performing assets) formation is coming down, and fund managers are liking banks, from medium term perspective,” Agrawal added.Infosys was the most sold stock, after the country’s second-largest software exporter completed Rs13,000 crore share buyback in December. Fund managers offloaded Rs1,541 crore of the stock last month.“Selling seen in Infosys is just because of the buyback. It is still the most-loved IT stock by fund mangers,” said Belapurkar.Infosys was the only software company to feature in the top 10 holdings of mutual funds at the end of 2017, and was the fifth-most held stock, as mutual funds collectively held Rs20,494 crore of the stock in their schemes.