Graphic by Subrata Jana/MintIn any other year, this month would have been the occasion to wonder if ITC Ltd would face a hike in duties on cigarettes in the Budget. Under the goods and services tax (GST), that has changed as the rate fixing decision now rests with the GST Council. Not that it has made life easier for ITC. The surprise hike in cess on cigarettes in July has hit ITC’s performance for the second quarter now.Its packaged consumer goods business has recovered but that is good for sales growth alone. Year-on-year growth is not comparable due to accounting differences under GST. Its comparable consumer business growth was 16.2%, similar to the 17% growth that Hindustan Unilever Ltd reported. Overall, ITC’s net sales rose by 5.7% over a year ago.ITC needs its cigarettes business to normalize for sales growth to revive but especially for profitability to improve. Even if this were to happen sometime in fiscal 2019, if the government repeats its tax hikes on cigarettes, it may again set back ITC’s growth.On a sequential basis, ITC’s profitability has improved with its segment margin rising by 96 basis points. One basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point. But cigarettes played no role in that as its margin declined by 1.7 percentage points, which should worry investors. Margins improved mainly due to higher contribution from packaged consumer goods, trading in agricultural products and hotels.If the improvement in the other businesses sustain, that can support profitability but ITC’s cigarettes business still contributes to 84% of segment profits. There is no alternative at this point by comparable size and profitability to offset a declining situation in its cigarettes business. Cigarette volumes are estimated to have declined by about 2% during the quarter, over a year ago, according to Motilal Oswal Securities Research.And, ITC continues to invest heavily in businesses such as consumer products and hotels, which tends to pull down their contribution to profits, although they may add to sales growth. ITC’s net profit before exceptional items rose by a mere 1.1% over a year ago and the reported solid 16.7% increase was chiefly due to exceptional items.ITC’s results indicate the worst is not behind it yet. Investors will want to see volumes revive and profitability improve at its cigarettes business. But a thriving cigarettes business could again tempt the government to tap it for higher tax revenues, if the need arises. That dagger continues to dangle overhead even if it may not fall during the 2018 budget.After Hindustan Unilever Ltd’s results, ITC’s shares perked up, perhaps on hopes that consumer businesses are seeing a gradual recovery in demand. ITC’s shares have been underperforming the market and its peers.A recovery in growth would imply a change in its valuations too. But the results are likely to dash investors’ hopes. As things stand, pricey though its shares may be, HUL has much more going for it than ITC has.
The Supreme Court was hearing a plea by the Centre seeking to be heard by the apex court on the issue. Photo: MintNew Delhi: The Supreme Court on Monday stayed proceedings in all high courts, challenging the constitutional validity of imposition of 12% goods and services tax (GST) on sanitary napkins.The matter was brought before a bench headed by chief justice Dipak Misra who said that the matter would now be heard by the apex court and issued notice to petitioners in high courts.The court was hearing a plea by the Centre seeking to be heard by the apex court on the issue. It sought a stay on proceedings pending in various high courts across the country challenging GST on sanitary napkins so that the apex court could take over the matter.Clarifying on the tax incidence on sanitary napkins under GST, it was set at 12%, a shade lower than 13.7% in the previous indirect tax regime. The rate has been challenged across various high courts for being “arbitrary and discriminatory”.A petition brought by a student in the Delhi high court recognized that sanitary napkins were not a luxury but a basic necessity for women and stated as “shocking” its clubbing with other items such as toys, leather goods, roasted coffee, mobile phones and processed food.Arguing about the arbitrariness of the imposition of 12% GST on sanitary napkins, the petitioner had emphasized that goods such as “kajal, kumkum, bindi, sindur, alta, plastic and glass bangles, hearing aids, passenger baggage, puja samagri of all kinds, and all types of contraceptives, including condoms, had in fact been subjected to a ‘nil’ tax rate under the GST”.
According to the recent half yearly real estate report from Knight Frank India, for the first time a real correction was observed in property prices during the July–December 2017 period. In a Facebook Live discussion with Mint, Mudassir Zaidi, executive director – north, Knight Frank India, discussed how the year 2017 was for real estate and what to expect in 2018, as far as real estate is concerned, especially in the residential segment of the market. Edited excerpts:How was the year 2017 as far as real estate is concerned? Did it meet your expectations?The year 2017 was quite a watershed year for real estate, specifically for the residential segment. If you remember, in 2016 end we were hit by demonetization and that was the start of the change of structure of the market that we are in currently. Then early 2017, we had the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 (Rera), which came in and then we had Goods and Services Tax (GST), and then the insolvency and bankruptcy Act which came in. All these regulatory initiatives from the government have really brought a paradigm shift in the nature of the industry. The first and the immediate impact that came in was largely on launches. The overall market was anyway going through a lull or bearish phase for last three odd years and what happened was immediately, the government regulation brought about a stop in terms of new launches. So, developers held back in terms of launches. If I just talk about NCR as a region as an example of that, in peak times we were launching about 177,000 units a year, but in 2017 only 11,300 units were launched.You can see the impact that this had. Bearish phase plus these regulations brought about that impact in terms of launches. On the other side, obviously all these initiatives also brought about a trust deficit in the consumer’s mind and therefore we are still seeing in terms of number of sales, one of the lowest numbers in terms of units being sold. So if I look at NCR as a region in peak time, we were selling 1,17,000 units a year and in 2017 we sold only 37,000 units.Essentially, it made a huge difference in terms of what happened in the early years and the impact of government regulations and the bearish phase in 2017.Is this all because of policy changes, or there were other issues that were there in the sector due to which homebuyers stayed away from buying?It’s a combination of both. The legacy issues that the sector has—such as project delays and insolvency that lot of developers faced, not just delays but a lot of delinquencies as well—those issues really resulted in a lot of bearishness coming into the market. Earlier, a lot of speculation also took place in the market, but once the buyers left, the investors—or the speculators—also left the market. So those were legacy issues that contributed to this. But 2017 specifically was largely impacted by government regulations. However, these government regulations are absolutely positive for the longer term. So, any change that happens will always take time in terms of adaptation by the stakeholders in the industry. So developers are taking time to comply with the regulations. Buyers are looking at how the market is moving, and how the regulation will impact developers. A lot of consolidation has started happening in the industry. So it’s a phase where the entire industry is consolidating, and we are seeing ‘wait and watch’ approach by a lot of developers as well as a lot of buyers. But all of this is definitely good for the long-term survival of the industry. Certainly, for the next one or one and half years, I would expect to be a consolidating phase, but eventually after that we should start seeing recovery.It’s been half year or a year since all these changes were implemented. Do you think things have now settled down or is the market still struggling with the impact and will it continue to suffer the effects for some more time?No, I certainly see another year or year and a half of consolidation. First, Rera is still taking time. Obviously it came into effect from last financial year but we are still seeing that a lot of states are yet to enact, or rather implement the law fully and the regulators are just being appointed, and websites are still being made operational. While some states are far ahead of the others but then there are many who are yet to fully implement the Act. Once that implementation happens, I see a phase where developers will take time to fully register projects and buyers will take time to understand the impact of how things will happen.So I expect another year or year and a half of this phase to continue, where we see consolidation, where I don’t expect too many launches to go up. I don’t expect sales number to go up significantly, but once this consolidation continues to happen, after that we should start seeing increase in launches as well as buyers interest coming in, and eventually the recovery to come up.If we talk about Rera, how long do you think it would take to give real benefits to homebuyers?I certainly think the benefit is starting to accrue. I certainly see a change in the behaviour of developers. Earlier, we used to see launches happening blindly, irrespective of how much unsold inventory was there in the market. That didn’t matter. Yet I would see a lot of developer launching left, right and centre. That has now stopped. The first thing is that a lot of developers are giving far more importance to completion of the projects that they are into, rather then just looking at new launches. So we are seeing a change of behaviour from the developers’ side. Second, in terms of financial prudence, I see a lot of developers now focusing on completion, utilizing the money that is being raised into the asset that they raised it for and eventually looking at completing those projects. So, benefits are continuing.The trust and the credibility factor are starting slowly and steadily coming back into the market but it will take some more time before we get out of the lull. After so many years of unregulated markets, some benefits have already started to accrue.Given that the sales are down across India and inventory is high, developers are having ready-to-move in stocks; things are not expected to change anytime soon. In such a scenario, don’t you think homebuyers are right if they are expecting further decline in home prices?My sense is that in terms of prices, for example in 2017, we did see a fall in prices for the first time, in terms of the headline numbers.Up till now, while reductions were not in terms of the basic selling price, customers were able to get reduced prices in terms of waiving off of charges related to floor preference, or preferential location charges, or other charges like car parking. But, now for the first time, you’re seeing an actual price drop happening to some extent. However what I expect is that the market will behave in a slightly dichotomous manner: one is in terms of ready stock or the very near-to-ready stock. And specifically for stronger developers, I see when the unsold stocks start to go down, the prices would slightly firm up there.However, in the unsold stock, in the early stage projects, that is where I see a little softness to continue or maybe we might see slightly better prices coming up in the time to come—possibly in the next 6 months or so.But I would say, if you have already shortlisted a particular project, if you already like something, then my sense is that when you sit across the table, you will certainly get good deals in hand.
Stocks of Asian Paints Limited closed at Rs1,176.70 per share, down 1.40%, while the benchmark BSE Sensex closed 0.81% higher at 35,798.01 points. Photo: Satish Kaushik/MintMumbai: Asian Paints Limited, the country’s largest paints firm, on Monday posted a 15.9% rise in consolidated net profit for the quarter ended 31December, even as revenue remained flat on a consolidated level. Profit from continuing operations was up 19.5% year-on-year.Asian Paints’ revenue from operations was flat at Rs4,267.49 crore, although comparable growth in revenue was 10.9% year-on-year, after GST effects on line items. Consolidated net profit for the period stood at Rs567.21 crore up from Rs489.31 crore in the December 2016 quarter.“The Decorative Paints business registered single digit volume growth in the current quarter,” K.B.S. Anand, managing director and chief executive of Asian Paints, said in a statement. “In the international markets, units in Bangladesh, Oman, Bahrain, and Nepal witnessed good growth. However, the international group performance was impacted by adverse exchange rate fluctuations in some key markets,” he said.However, the company’s input costs also rose rapidly, up 13.66% from a year earlier to Rs2,142.17 crore for the quarter. This was largely led by higher prices of crude and Titanium Dioxide, both crucial factors in paints markets. While Brent Crude prices hit a three-year high at $70 a barrel this month, prices of Titanium Dioxide are up nearly 38% since January 2016.“There is not much by way of a base effect of demonetization because paints companies made most of their sales in the September quarter of 2016, during the festival Diwali season,” Sachin Bobade, equity research analyst at Dolat Capital said. “We estimate volume growth for the quarter was at 7% year-on-year. This is still low, largely because demand in rural markets is low,” he said.“Asian Paints will have to take a price hike, because their gross margin is at just 150 basis points,” Bobade said. “They are largely managing on reduced A&P (advertising and promotion) spends. I don’t expect A&P spending to rise until the company takes price hikes,” he added.Asian Paints is not satisfied with its volume growth rates and is considering a price hike, its management said in a conference call with analysts on Monday.“We are definitely not happy with the volume growth we are getting,” Anand said. “However, our value growth is reasonable. We don’t think we are losing market share, but the growth in the paints industry has not been good enough for us to grow higher.”“The demand has not yet reached pre-GST levels in our opinion. The overall economy growth has still not reached the numbers it was reaching earlier,” Anand added.Stocks of Asian Paints Limited closed at Rs1,176.70 per share, down 1.40%, while the benchmark BSE Sensex closed 0.81% higher at 35,798.01 points. The results were declared after markets closed.