Trai chairman R.S. Sharma. Photo: Ramesh Pathania/MintNew Delhi: Telecom operators have made a pitch for a reduction in levies payable to the government and a long-term policy for spectrum auctions, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Trai) chairman R.S. Sharma said.The regulator met top officials of telecom service providers (TSPs) on Tuesday to outline issues to be taken up with Trai in the course of 2018.“TSPs raised the issue of multiplicity of levies which they have to pay... they said GST... whether there could be some rationalisation in this particular aspect or not,” Sharma said, adding that the regulator has sought more inputs after which it will decide whether or not to issue a consultation paper.Telecom operators pay around 3-5% and 8% of their adjusted gross revenue as spectrum usage charges and licence fees, respectively, to the government. Telecom services also attract 18% GST.In a written reply to the Lok Sabha in November, telecom minister Manoj Sinha said that the department of telecommunications has suggested to the finance ministry that GST on telecom services be lowered to 12%.The recommendation was made as part of the annual budget exercise and the matter is with the finance ministry’s department of revenue for necessary action, Sinha had said. A decision to change the tax rate has to be approved by the GST Council, the federal body that decides on all indirect tax matters.Trai has in the past recommended that the telecom department cut licence fees and spectrum usage charges, given the debt burden on telecom operators. The regulator has also favoured a reduction in GST rate.According to estimates by the Indian Banks Association, the total liabilities of the telecom sector stood at Rs7.75 trillion as on 31 March, of which bank borrowings and liabilities towards spectrum payment to the telecom department stood at Rs5.8 trillion.The sector is in the midst of a tariff war started by new entrant Reliance Jio Infocomm Ltd, which offered services free for almost seven months and later announced rock-bottom tariffs in April. This led to pressure on revenue streams of other operators who were forced to match tariffs.The government is working on a new telecom policy that will review the current licensing regime, among other issues. The government aims to introduce the policy before the end of the current financial year.“The new telecom policy discussion took place quite extensively. Everybody was of the view that we need to position the new telecom policy as one which should position the sector as an enabler for the entire economy. That should be the broad focus of the new telecom policy,” Sharma said on Tuesday.Operators also favoured a long-term spectrum policy with a definite timeline for auction of airwaves.Infrastructure issues related to setting up of telecom towers, including right-of-way, were also discussed, a person present in the meeting with telecom operators said on condition of anonymity.“Telecom is an enabler for 5G, Internet of Things, agriculture, education, smart cities, transport, etc. It is an enabling infrastructure which should be treated with that importance and therefore whatever the issues are relating to infrastructure we need to have a consultation on them,” Sharma said.
The regulator aims to provide inputs on the new telecom policy to the government in the next few weeks, Sharma said.Analysts expect the last full-year budget before general elections in 2019 to have a heavier dose of populism. Photo: BloombergMumbai: Analysts expect the last full-year budget before general elections in 2019, which will be presented against the backdrop of uncertainty over tax collections post implementation of the goods and services tax (GST), to have a heavier dose of populism.The government is expected to further enhance its focus on spending towards agriculture and rural themes in this year’s budget. Analysts expect higher allocation to Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), other rural development schemes and irrigation projects are likely to receive a big boost, while higher minimum support prices (MSPs) for agricultural crops could also be on the cards.According to Motilal Oswal Securities Ltd, consumption pick-up (especially rural and discretionary), cyclical recovery in corporate facing banks and gradual pick-up in private capex are our key themes to play in 2018. It said that from an equity market perspective, it is important to see how the budget is able to make a difference to the rural sector, how the government is able to carry the burden of expectations, and whether the budget strikes the right balance between good economics and good politics, especially with the general elections around the corner next year.With the budget ahead, here are few stocks to watch out for.Auto stocks, particularly Hero MotoCorp, TVS Motor, M&M: Focus on rural markets is expected to place the two-wheeler industry back on the growth path. Motilal Oswal said benefits of normal monsoon and 7th Pay Commission could drive two-wheeler volume compounded annual growth rate of 10-12% over FY17-19.ITC: Cigarette volumes have come under pressure after a 16% increase over earlier levels of GST. Motilal Oswal expects ITC to implement a weighted-average price hike of 14-15% to pass on the impact of higher GST rate. Any increase in ad valorem duty needs to be watched out. Unlike earlier years, the company has not taken any price increase ahead of the budget this year. If the expected increase comes through, volumes could come under further pressure.Increase in total budgetary allocation towards rural and MNREGA will be positive for FMCG firms.HDFC Securities sees a neutral to mild increase in taxes during the upcoming budget, since the government has taken two hikes recently.“Its other businesses like paper, agriculture, FMCG and hotels are doing well, and could be beneficiaries in the forthcoming Budget. Going by the valuations enjoyed by the players in each of these segments, ITC could see a re-rating to play catch up with them,” HDFC Securities said.Banks and insurance companies: Analysts said higher allocation of funds to core sectors like infrastructure, housing, particularly affordable housing, and urban development. The budget is expected to bring more clarity over recapitalisation bonds for state-owned banks. All corporate banks—particularly State Bank of India, Punjab National Bank and ICICI Bank—will be worth watching out for.Non-banking financial companies (NBFC): Analysts expect higher budgetary allocation for the MUDRA scheme. All housing finance companies will be beneficiaries of it.
India, traditionally, followed state-specified rates of entertainment tax levied on individual movie tickets. Photo: ReutersNew Delhi: A little over six months after the implementation of the goods and services tax (GST), multiplex owners in the country are hoping for some respite from the exorbitant tax rates currently in place. The Indian film industry that produces close to 2,000 movies a year across multiple languages is working with the 28% rate levied under the GST since last July.Especially for states that previously worked with rates as low as zero, this has meant not just an increase in ticket prices but a boost to movie piracy as well.“Obviously, the top priority is for entertainment tax to be lowered,” said Rajendar Singh, vice-president, programming and distribution, INOX Leisure Ltd. “Cinema is not just the cheapest but the only form of entertainment for many in this country.”The GST Council should definitely address the issue of ticket pricing which should be brought under the 18% tax regime for the betterment of the multiplex industry, said Amit Sharma, managing director, Miraj Cinemas. There should also be a systematic mechanism on tax exemptions which were given prior to the GST regime as multiplex owners have invested lots of money into it, he added.India, traditionally, followed state-specified rates of entertainment tax levied on individual movie tickets—while states like Delhi and Maharashtra worked on figures of 40% and 45%, respectively, others like Punjab had zero per cent tax rate. All of that has changed with GST coming in last year and multiplex owners have consistently complained of the previously low blended entertainment tax across the country getting impacted. States with low rates previously have suddenly seen ticket prices spiral. For example, in Andhra Pradesh, entertainment tax has gone up to 28% from 16.66%.Worst hit by this move have been single screens, which are not as well-equipped as multiplexes to combat the crisis. Restricted to playing 4-5 shows a day and one or two films at a time and working on rental basis, where they command a fixed share of 20-25% of a movie’s box office compared to revenue-sharing arrangements like the multiplexes, their state has been quite dismal lately.There are other reasons too to support a lower tax rate. India has one of the largest film industries in the world despite which its screen penetration is among the lowest—less than 10,000 screens for a population of 1.25 billion, as compared to China’s 35,000-plus screens for a population of 1.35 billion. Moreover, the fact that movie-viewing, a clean and wholesome means of family entertainment, has been placed under the 28% regime, along with activities like gambling and racing, has theatre owners worried.Singh said the other need of the hour is a reduction in or elimination of local body taxes. Many states, especially in the south, have empowered local bodies such as municipal corporations, municipalities, panchayats, local and district councils, etc. with the ability to levy an additional entertainment tax outside the GST regulatory framework. That essentially means that cinema owners have been paying not just the exorbitant 28% GST, but a 10-25% local body entertainment tax on top of that.
