GST may hit India’s rating in the ‘Paying Taxes’ category of World Bank’s ease of doing business ranking, where it stands at 119th position, improving from 172 a year ago. Photo: PTINew Delhi: A year after India recorded its sharpest jump of 30 places to 100th place in the 2018 World Bank’s ease of doing business rankings, government officials are worried that complex returns filing procedures and delays in refund of input tax credits under the goods and services tax (GST) regime may prove a drag on the country’s ranking, to be released in October.“The survey for the next Doing Business ranking will start in February and will continue till May. Unless government takes quick corrective steps, GST may prove to be a dampener in the first (post-GST) year of the ranking though it will improve our ranking in subsequent years,” a commerce and industry ministry official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.Unless government takes quick corrective steps, GST may prove to be a dampener in the first (post-GST) year of the ranking though it will improve our ranking in subsequent years- A commerce and industry ministry official, requesting anonymityThe official added that reforms undertaken in other areas such as dealing with construction permits, starting a business and enforcing contracts could still improve India’s overall ranking. The National Democratic Alliance, which has been seeking an improvement in India’s ease of doing business ranking to attract greater foreign investments, has set ambitious targets for itself. According to an output-outcome framework document prepared by the government, India is looking to move to rank of 30 by 2020.The Narendra Modi government introduced the GST regime on 1 July 2017 by subsuming dozens of state and central indirect taxes to transform India into a single market. However, complex filing procedures and delays in refund of input tax credits, especially for exporters, have drawn flak.India’s rating may be hit in the “Paying Taxes” category of the Doing Business ranking, where it stands at 119th position, improving from 172 a year ago as it made payments of the Employees Provident Fund electronic and introduced a set of administrative measures easing compliance on corporate income tax.“Paying Taxes” measures payments, time, total tax and contribution rate for a medium-sized firm to comply with all tax regulations as well as post-filing processes. While the country will benefit on the number of taxes paid in a year as GST subsumes dozens of state and central taxes, it may take a hit on the number of hours required to file the taxes and compliance time of GST refund process, captured in the post-filing index.The World Bank included the “post-filing index” criteria for the first time in its 2017 Doing Business report under the “Paying Taxes” head. This restricted India’s improvement in ranking to just one place—to 130 out of 190 countries—despite a slew of reforms undertaken by the government.The post-ﬁling index is based on four components—time to comply with GST refund, time to obtain GST refund, time to comply with corporate income tax audit and time to complete a corporate income tax audit. The GST refund is an integral component of a modern indirect tax system. Some businesses incur more VAT on their purchases than they collect on their taxable sales in a given tax period and are, therefore, entitled to claim the difference from the tax authorities.According to an output-outcome framework document prepared by the government, India is looking to move to rank of 30 by 2020“The introduction of GST in India from 1 July 2017 is a landmark tax reform with significant implications for Indian companies’ tax compliance. The introduction comes too late to be reflected in the data for Paying Taxes 2018, but it will be interesting to see the impact it has in future, particularly on the time it takes to comply with consumption taxes in 2017 and on the GST elements of the post-filing index,” Pratik Jain, partner and national leader-indirect tax, K. Sivarajan, partner, and Kartik Solanki director, PwC India wrote in a joint note in the World Bank’s special report on Paying Taxes 2018, released in November 2017.Prior to the introduction of GST, India had a very complex indirect tax structure with multiple central and state levies such as excise duties on manufacture, taxes on inter-state and intra-state sale of goods, service tax on the provision of services, entry tax on imports into states, etc. These taxes were also administered by different authorities. Furthermore, tax rates on sales of goods and the exemptions were not uniform across states. All these taxes have now been subsumed into a GST levied on the “supply” of goods or services.Chanda Kochhar further said the second impact of demonetisation is the acceleration in digitisation of banking transactions. Photo: Bloomberg
Davos: India is seeing a huge surge in the net inflows into financial savings and has reached nearly Rs28 trillion in the last 18 months—an amount equivalent to entire GDP of countries like Thailand, top banker Chanda Kochhar has said. She also said the flow into financial savings has surged significantly since the demonetisation exercise of November 2016.Kochhar, who was participating in the World Economic Forum annual meeting, told PTI in an interview that formalisation of economy and digitisation of banking transactions have proved to be among the most significant benefits of the demonetisation exercise.On the GST and other reforms undertaken in India, she said since 2014, the government has focused on several structural reforms which are strengthening the economy. “The government has focussed on creating a sound policy framework, prudent fiscal management, strengthening the monetary policy framework, mitigating inflation risks, improving ease of doing business, encouraging adoption of digital technology.”“Pioneering initiatives like GST and demonetisation have led to increasing formalisation of the economy and financialisation of savings. These changes are forging new paradigms and I expect the government to continue to focus on steps that will augur well for the economy,” the ICICI Bank chief said.On her take on the economic impact of demonetisation after more than one year having passed, Kochhar said an important outcome of demonetisation has been the structural shift in terms of financialisation of savings.The financial services sector, including banks, insurance companies and mutual funds, are the biggest beneficiaries of the formalisation of savings, she added. “Post demonetisation, there has been a net inflow of Rs19 trillion of financial savings into bank deposits, mutual funds and life insurance put together.“If we look at the 18 month period from April 2016 onwards, the net inflow into financial savings in the country has been about Rs28 trillion which is equivalent to the GDP of an entire country like Thailand,” she said.Kochhar further said the second impact of demonetisation is the acceleration in digitisation of banking transactions. The monthly volume for UPI transactions during demonetisation in November 2016 was 1 million transactions which has increased to 145 million transactions as of December 2017.Mobile banking transactions have almost doubled to nearly 150 million in October 2017 as compared to over a year back, she added. Similarly, the number of debit card transactions has also more than doubled post demonetisation. These are important benefits that will have far-reaching impact on the economy,” Kochhar said. PTI
The finance ministry says one crore taxpayers have been registered under GST till 24 January. Photo: PTINew Delhi: Halting two months of decline, the GST collections gathered momentum in December, rising to Rs86,703 crore.“Total revenue collections under GST for the month of December 2017 (received in December 2017/January up to 24 January, 2018) has been Rs86,703 crores till 24 January, 2018,” the finance ministry said in a tweet.Total collections under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) in November had slipped for the second straight month to Rs80,808 crore, from over Rs83,000 crore in October. In September, it was over Rs92,150 crore.The ministry further said that one crore taxpayers have been registered under GST till 24 January, of which 17.11 lakh are composition dealers who are required to file returns every quarter. As many as 56.30 lakh GSTR 3B returns have been filed for December, it said.For the composition dealers, for the July-September quarter, the last date of filing GSTR 4 Return was 24 December, it said. A total of 8.10 lakh returns were filed by them amounting to Rs335.86 crore. For the October-December quarter, the last date for filing GSTR 4 return was 18 January, and a total of 9.25 lakh returns were filed by composition dealers paying a sum of Rs421.35 crore, it added.