Talking to ET Now , CMD,, says appliances is a very price sensitive segment and a 10% reduction will increase sales volume as the demand will go up.Edited excerpts:Absolutely there is no comparison. As it is, the second half is always better than the first half. But more than that, there were retailers and dealers who are still getting their act right in terms of getting their registration etc.July and August was weak. However, October onwards, it has really picked up well and I expect that second half there will be positive growth both in consumer products and in our EPC business both of them should grow very well.The most important thing which comes up is that our whole distribution is now concentrating on semi-urban areas and that is where the future growth is because the penetration levels are very low there compared to cities. For small appliances, in case of those areas, there are still a lot of scope and aspiration levels are still there.A new company cannot enter every time and therefore we have less competition and can expect better growth coming out of those areas.Basically, we keep looking at secondary sales and what happens is many of the small dealers, especially retailers. Though the GST came in from 1st of July, if they had stock on 30th June they could continue because those are not computerised, they are not automated. And thus they could continue till 20th of July and still bill it on the 30th June basis.Therefore to that extent, in July, they still had stocks of June which they were selling in June dated. Because of that, we keep looking at secondary sales.We find secondary sales to be quite satisfactory till even July, August though primary sale was down as they were getting rid of their June stocks.Two things have happened. Earlier it was 100 plus 28% which is 128%. We have straightaway reduced it according with 18% GST rate. Though our input cost have come up, we have not passed it on because we feel that government will get wrong impression that they reduced by 10% and we did not pass it on.So, across the board, we kept our price same. Pre GST and post GST, we have kept it same. Our naturalisation has remained the same, we are only looking it how do we control our cost and a few percent margins go, it does not matter.We are expecting that in consumer durables, which is still in the 28% bracket, the rate of taxation will also come down to 18% because two days back they were looking to bring GST down to 18% from 28% for air conditioners and refrigerators. Obviously toasters and mixies cannot be luxury products. It is understood if they bring the appliances taxes down, we will also lower prices.It is a very price sensitive segment and a 10% reduction will definitely increase our sales volume as the demand will go up.We are finding that in premium segment, you make better margins but the demand is not in the sub economy but rather in the economy segment because a lot of people say we do not want the lowest end and we would like to have medium levels. Therefore the real premium is not having such a good growth for us compared to the normal economy range where we see better growth.Yes, because this EMI has become very comfortable. Earlier, Indians were little hesitant to go for EMIs because the savings type of attitude was there. But for the younger generations, it is let me enjoy today and do not worry about the future. Therefore a lot of finance companies are finding that there is a lot of demand for financing of consumer durable also.What you are saying is going to happen. A lot of people who want to buy, will buy fans, mixers, appliances. Bajaj Alliance says that they have brought the minimum level to Rs 5000. So, if two-three people together decide to buy in one invoice worth Rs 5000, they can be financed. That is why even a fan can be financed and even smaller items can be financed because the total package has to be at least Rs 5000 in case of Bajaj Finance for Bajaj Electrical products. I do not know about others.