With Durga puja, the biggest festival of West Bengal, knocking at the door, the Goods and Services Tax (GST) imposed in July has turned out to be a bane for the famous Kumartuli idol makers of Kolkata.The artisans said, the new tax regime has created lot of confusion among them as well as customers as the new tax is difficult for them to understand and implement.“This new tax regime is a still not clear. The prices of materials such as false hair, kajal, arms made of aluminium and steel, and sari have gone up. Due to this confusion in GST, customers' budget on Durga idols have also come down this year,” spokesperson of Kumartuli Mritshilpa Sanskriti Samity Babu Pal said.The existence of Kumartuli, a clay modellers colony in the northern part of the city by the Hooghly river, goes back to the 19th century. The idols made by them not are only worshipped in Kolkata but also in other parts of the country.They are experts in not only making clay idols but also of fibre, which are mostly sent abroad.“We deliver fibre images to various countries of North America, South America and Europe. But after GST, the transportation cost by air or ship has increased manifold. We apprehend that our business would be affected due to escalation in prices,” Pal said.According to the potters, the cost of clay and bamboo, required for making internal structure of idols, too has gone up.Ranajit Sarkar, who deals with raw materials needed for making idols, said, “We had faced a tough time last year due to demonetisation. This year the GST is taking a heavy toll on our business and that too in the peak season,”.The peak season for idol makers starts from July – when they start preparation for making Durga idols – and continue till February – the time of Saraswati puja.With monsoon season in full swing, the potters need to use fans and heat guns to dry up the paints on the idols, but the possibility of higher electricity bills also worries the artisans.“Our profit margin will come down to a large extent. It means tough time for our industry for the next one year,” Sarkar said.
Hospitality major EIH Ltd, which runs hotels under 'Oberoi' and 'Trident' brands, on Wednesday said the new 28 per cent Goods and Services Tax rate for hotels charging over Rs 7,500 in room tariff will have an adverse impact on the industry."The announcement that hotels charging over Rs 7,500 in room charges will attract 28 per cent GST will be detrimental to tourism and employment in the hospitality industry," company's Executive Chairman P.R.S. Oberoi told shareholders at the 67th Annual General Meeting here.According to the company's latest annual report, the application of the highest rate of 28 per cent to a significant part of the hospitality industry will make the destination more expensive and will adversely affect its capability to generate revenue and employment.Responding to this, company's Executive Vice President S.S. Mukherji said: "The effect of GST has increased taxation in the hands of customers, and somewhere it was between 19-20 per cent in various states. It has gone up to 28 per cent, and eight per cent extra expense is going to work negatively."He also said the new indirect tax regime has just started and its impact on the company's business was to be seen.The company will open The Oberoi, New Delhi, after renovation in January 2018. The estimated renovation cost was Rs 500 crore of which Rs 300 crore has already been invested.
The Lok Sabha on Wednesday passed legislation to extend the Goods and Services Tax (GST) to Jammu and Kashmir, making it part of the "one nation, one tax" regime.The House passed the the Central Goods and Services Tax (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir), Bill, 2017 and the Integrated Goods and Services Tax (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir), Bill, 2017 after a brief discussion in which members by and large welcomed the measures.The two bills replace an order promulgated by the President.The first bill provides for the extension of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,2017 to Jammu and Kashmir and the other provides for the extension of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax IGST Act,2017 to the State. Replying to the discussion, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said GST's extension to Jammu and Kashmir is a positive step for the state and the country."The dream of economic integration of the country has been full filled."The minister also refuted the Congress allegations that GST infringes upon the special status of the state."A national party like Congress should not have got into it. This was an argument given by the seperatists," he said.Jaitley said had Jammu and Kashmir not implemented GST then consumers and traders in the state would have been denied the benefits of input cost."In such a circumstance, the cost of products in Pathankot (near the Jammu and Kashmir border) would have been cheaper than in Jammu and Kashmir. In this case, the traders in Jammu and Kashmir will buy products from Pathankot and would sell them in state. This would not have been a good situation for the consumers and traders of the state and even it would have impacted negatively the revenue of the state," he said.Earlier moving the bills, Jaitley said: "The state assembly had passed the State Goods and Services Tax and integrated it with the GST and in view of it, these two bills have been brought."The Congress crticised the government for taking ordinance route for implementing various laws."The government should ensure that the new tax regime will not affect the fiscal autonomy of the state," Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury said.