Close to a hundred representatives of various sweetmeat makers from across West Bengal began a three-day relay hunger strike here on Friday to protest the imposition of Goods and Services Tax (GST).The strike coincides with the occasion of Ganesh Chaturthi, a day when sweets from ‘barfi’ to ‘modaks’ are in high demand.The hunger-strike comes days after a state-wide strike by sweet manufacturers against the new tax regime.“Irrespective of our products being high on demand for Ganesh Chaturthi, we have all gathered here in the city to protest against GST. There are people from districts like Malda, Howrah and Birbhum,” West Bengal Mistanna Byabasayee Samity’s General Secretary R.K. Paul told IANS.Iconic sweet-makers K.C. Das, whose erstwhile owner Nabin Chandra Das is widely regarded as the inventor of the rosogolla in 1868, said they are also pitching in the hunger strike.“I am going there myself and we will be there for the next two days,” K.C. Das’s Director Dhiman Das said.While the industry is directly responsible for the livelihoods of at least 10 lakh people, Paul said, there is no estimate of those living off the business indirectly.Elaborating on their opposition to GST, he said the Rs 50,000 crore industry in Bengal is “hugely different” from the sweet-making ventures in other states, in terms of the products being “highly perishable”, a category exempted from the new tax regime.“We deal with highly perishable goods. Our sweets are very delicate and have a shelf life of only 24 hours. In other states, the kind of sweets they produce is different and can stay on for longer. We were exempted from VAT. The Centre has exempted highly perishable goods from GST. We don’t understand why they included our sweets in GST if they are highly perishable,” Paul said.Confectioners said what has added to their woes is that their products fall under all slabs — 28 per cent for any sandesh/sweet with chocolate in it, five per cent for rosogolla and sandesh, and 12 per cent for mishti doi.In addition to the evergreen traditional recipes of rosogolla, mishti doi and sandesh, Bengal sweetmeat makers have adapted to modern tastes by incorporating ingredients like chocolates, fruit pulps like those of mangoes, kiwis and blueberries and extending their repertoire with innovations like ice-cream sandesh and kulfi sandesh.
Unlike the technical snags faced by traders earlier, the first return filing under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) was progressing smoothly on Friday, the last day to file form GSTR-3B, tax accountants said.August 25 is the last date for filing GSTR-3B form, which is a summary return of details of outward supplies, inward supplies, credit and payment of GST, for the month of July.“Today, GSTR-3B filing is a smooth ride. The portal is working without technical snags. In a few cases, taxpayers have already uploaded their details and have informed that it is much faster,” chartered accountant Jigar Doshi, Partner, SKP Business Consulting, told IANS.The government earlier had announced a five-day extension for filing GST returns till August 25, after the GST return filing portal had stopped functioning and traders across the country could not file returns due to a technical snag.“The GST site is responsive and we hope it remains so during uploading of invoice level GSTR-1 filings. We hope to have similar snag-free experience in GSTR-1 filings,” Atul Bohra, Chief Financial Officer, Kolte Patil Developers, said.Apart from GSTR 3B, three forms — GSTR 1, GSTR 2 and GSTR 3 — need to be filed by businesses. For the month of July, the three forms will have to be filed between September 1 and 5, September 6 and 10 and September 11 and 15, respectively.Form GSTR 1 would reflect sales of a business, GSTR 2 would reflect purchases and GSTR 3 is a combination of sales and purchases.For the month of August, the three forms will have to be filed between September 16-20, September 21-25 and September 26-30, respectively.Pune-based chartered accountant Pritam Mahure, however, said that in a few cases, the GST payment was not appearing.“Today is the last day for filing GSTR-3B and the site is working. However, in a few cases due to non-appearing of GST payment, taxpayers are unable to file returns. We hope the government quickly addresses these challenges by discussing with banks,” he said.For those who want to avail transitional input tax credit, the deadline for filing GSTR-3B is August 28. The summary return for the month of August is to be filed by September 20.
