Sanjeev Sharma

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, August 2: India Inc was expecting a steeper rate cut more in consonance with market realities, the CII said in a statement Industry body Ficci said the current situation warranted a steeper cut of 50 bps Assocham said the 25 bps cut may not make much of a difference to debt servicing burden of borrowers, but would improve sentiment Industry body PHDCI said reduction in key lending rate would not only reduce costs of doing business, but also enhance exporters' competitiveness Key policy rate reduced by 0.25% to 6% Reverse repo rate cut by 0.25% to 5.75% Focus on keeping headline inflation close to 4% on a durable basis Growth forecast unchanged at 7.3% for the current fiscal Four members of the Monetary Policy Committee voted for 0.25% rate cut To boost investment and demand in the economy with growth impulses weakening, the Reserve Bank (RBI) today cut the benchmark repo rate by 25 basis points from 6.25 per cent to 6 per cent. This will result in cheaper home, auto and consumer durables loans. On the flip side, the interest rate will lead to a further fall in deposit rates.Already banks like the State Bank of India have lowered the rate offered on savings accounts, and fixed deposits for one year are at 6.5 per cent. Also, the government has cut interest rates on small savings schemes. The drop in deposit rates are leading to a paucity of investment avenues and driving more liquidity into the stock market.Acknowledging room for a rate cut as inflation is at a record low and risks to the upside are lower owing to a smooth GST rollout and normal monsoon, the RBI's six-member Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), in a split vote, decided to ease interest rates after a gap of 10 months to a six-year low. Lower interest rates by themselves will not translate into boosting investment or reviving consumer demand. On measures to revive the economy, RBI Governor Urjit Patel said the MPC was of the view that there was an urgent need to reinvigorate private investment, remove infrastructure bottlenecks and provide a major thrust to the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana. He said the government and the RBI were working in close coordination to resolve large stressed corporate borrowers and re-capitalise public sector banks within the fiscal deficit target. These efforts should help restart credit flows to productive sectors as demand revived. However, the RBI maintained its stance on rate cuts remained neutral as it expected pressure on inflation to come back. It said it would be watching the incoming data. Among the factors contributing to uncertainty on the inflation trajectory were implementation of farm loan waivers by states, which could result in possible fiscal slippages and undermine the quality of public spending, entailing inflationary spillovers. Subhash Chandra Garg, Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs, said the rate cut was an important step to converge towards real monetary conditions for sustained growth.
New Delhi, August 3: The first tax returns under the new Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime can be filed from Saturday and the facility will remain open till August 20, GST Network CEO Navin Kumar said on Thursday. Businesses can start filing their first GST returns and pay taxes for July on the portal of GST Network--the IT infrastructure provider for the new indirect tax regime, beginning August 5, he told PTI here. To make compliance easy for businesses, the GST Council has allowed businesses to initially file their returns on self-assessment basis in the first two months of the GST rollout. So, the GST returns for July and August will be filed on the Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN) portal by filling up GSTR 3B form. We will start the facility of filing interim return form GSTR 3B by August 5 and any registered entity who has transacted business in July will have to file the return by August 20, Kumar told PTI. GSTN has tied up with 25 agency banks authorised by the RBI to collect taxes, he said. We have tied up with all major banks, both private and public. The facility for tax payment is already on and Integrated GST is being collected. Along with filing of returns by August 20, payments for central and state GST will also come in, said Kumar, in-charge of the biggest technology backbone created for the new indirect tax regime. Over 71.3 lakh excise, service tax and VAT payers have migrated to the GSTN portal with 13 lakh fresh registrations. The final GST returns for July will have to be filed by these businesses by September 5 instead of August 10. Companies will have to file sale invoice for August with GST Network by September 20 instead of the earlier September 10. The sales returns for September will have to be filed by October 10.
New Delhi, August 3: Demand for gold in India for the second quarter (April-June) of 2017-18 was at 167.4 tonnes, up by 37 per cent compared to overall Q2 demand of 122.1 tonnes for 2016, World Gold Council data showed here on Thursday. India’s gold demand in Q2 2017 stood at 167.4 tonnes, a robust quarter, as seasonal demand and improved rural sentiment contributed to a 37 per cent year-on-year increase. Both jewellery and investment demand saw a healthy rise of 41 per cent and 26 per cent respectively, albeit on a low base of Q2 2016, said Somasundaram PR, Managing Director, India, World Gold Council. The gold demand value for the second quarter of 2017 was at Rs 43,600 crore, up by 32 per cent in comparison to Q2 2016 (Rs 33,090 crore). The total Jewellery demand in India for Q2 2017 was up by 41 per cent at 126.7 tonnes as compared to Q2 2016 (89.8 tonne). The value of jewellery demand was Rs 33,000 crore, up by 36 per cent from Q2 2016 (Rs. 24,350 crore). Though underlying concerns about GST and other transparency measures continue, predictably, positive sentiment returned with continued remonetisation and an expectation of good monsoons. This was evident in the sales momentum during Akshaya Tritiya supported by a relatively higher number of auspicious wedding days during the quarter, said Somasundaram. Looking ahead, in second half of year, as consumers and trade adapt to the new tax and compliance regime, growth will remain range bound even with good monsoons. Our full year demand estimate remains between 650 and 750 tonnes, the higher end of the range being more likely,he added.
