New Delhi, August 9: The government has notified the timeline for furnishing final tax returns for July and August under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime. The GST Council, chaired by Finance Minister Arun Jaitley and comprising state counterparts, had in June allowed businesses extended timeline for filing final GST returns in forms GSTR-1, GSTR-2 and GSTR-3 for July and August. In the interim period, businesses have to file GSTR-3B which is a summary of self-assessed tax liabilities with consolidated details of outward supplies and input credit. The Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) has now notified the dates for filing the GST returns forms. As per the notification, outward supplies in Form GSTR-1 for the month of July will have to be filed between September 1 and 5. For August, it is to be filed between September 16 and 20. The original date for filing GSTR-1 was 10th of the next month. Details of inward supplies in Form GSTR-2 for July will have to be filed between September 6 and 10. For August, the date is September 21-25. The original date for filing of GSTR-2 was 15th of the next month. Form GSTR-3 for July will now have to be filed between September 11 and 15 and for August the date is September 26-30. The original date for filing GSTR-3, which is the monthly return on the basis of finalisation of details of outward supplies and inward supplies along with the payment of amount of tax, was 20th of the next month. As regards GSTR-3B, the GST Network portal has started the facility for filing of July returns from August 5. The last date for filing the GSTR-3B for July 2017 is August 20, while the same for the month of August 2017 is September 20.
Chandigarh, August 9: With the demand for GST specialists having outstripped the supply, chartered accountants and tax consultants have hiked their fee by 15-30%, say traders. According to them, the monthly retainer fee for small trader now starts from Rs 5,000 and can go up to Rs 50,000, depending upon the turnover of the firm.There is shortage of specialised GST professionals in the country. Our members have informed that their respective chartered accountants have increased their retainer fee. The tax professionals cited reason that under the GST regime one has to ensure high compliance rate, so they have increased their fee. On an average, tax consultants and chartered accountants have increased their fee by 15-30%,said Piara Lal Seth, president, Punjab Pradesh Beopar Mandal. Praveen Khandelwal, secretary general, Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT), said there are 1.25 lakh independent practitioner chartered accountants in the country, of the total 3.5 lakh. Rest (around 2.25 lakh) chartered accountants are employed with big companies. According to rough estimates, around 90 lakh traders and manufacturers, which were under the ambit of service tax, VAT or excise, are likely to be migrated to GST. Already 74-75 lakh have migrated, according to GST network. Considering the fact, it’s apparent that we need more certified tax consultants to facilitate traders become GST-compliant, he said. He said, There are about four lakh tax practitioners and advocates in the country. My suggestion to the government is they should also be given equal status on a par with chartered accountant for GST to leverage the scope of making tax compliance. Earlier, staffing firm TeamLease had said accounting professionals such as chartered accountants were in demand. Fintech companies and GST software solution providers have hired many chartered accountants and software engineers, it said. Since the compliance under GST is high as compared to the previous arrangement, there is an increased burden on tax professionals, so they have hiked the fee, said a chartered accountant.
