New Delhi, August 30: Luxury car and SUV makers today expressed disappointment over the government approving an ordinance to increase the ceiling on cess to 25% from the present 15% over the peak rate of 28% GST on such vehicles. They said instead of providing initiatives to be able to deliver a bigger contribution to the Indian economy, the government was making it difficult for the luxury and SUV makers to survive with such high percentage of taxes. Audi India’s Head Rahil Ansari said, The taxes on this industry are already very high and this increase in cess rate will be detrimental to the luxury car industry as we will be forced to hike our prices to levels higher than pre-GST period. This is bound to adversely impact sales by possibly a double-digit reduction and will consequently reduce revenue for the company, dealers and perhaps also tax revenue for the government. The luxury car industry in India, while small in volumes, still contributes over 10% in value. While the segment definitely needs more positive initiatives from the government to be able to deliver a bigger contribution to the Indian economy, this scenario is clearly a setback. We request the GST Council to carefully evaluate the negative impact on this and, if a decision is taken on a 10% cess increase, postpone the implementation for another 6-12 months to evaluate the real impact of the GST on the automobile sector, in particular the luxury segment, he added. Mercedes-Benz India has also said the auto industry has requested the government to look at revising cess for the luxury cars after the festival season. Rohit Suri, President and Managing Director, Jaguar Land Rover India Ltd., said, The GST implementation on July 1 removed the cascading impact of multiple taxes applicable in the pre-GST regime, which we understand was one of the primary objectives of the government. The removal of the cascading impact enabled the industry to reduce prices and benefit the consumer and expand the market, which had been declining because of high taxation. Industry disappointed "This decision, contradictory to the requirement of creating a sustained demand, would rather affect the growth momentum adversely""The passing of ordinance to increase limit of cess to 25% is along the expected lines. What is critical to the industry is when, how much and on what criteria will the cess be increased""The taxes on this industry are already very high and this increase in cess will be detrimental to the luxury car industry as we will be forced to hike our prices to levels higher than pre-GST period""Reduced prices after GST implementation had helped in expanding the market, which had been declining because of high taxation. We hope the government and the GST Council will give due consideration to this matter and desist from raising the cess and putting a dampener on the positive momentum in demand that the industry had started to witness since July 1" Ordinance cleared to increase ceiling on levy by 10%
New Delhi, August 30: Luxury cars and sports utility vehicles (SUVs) are set to become dearer with the government today clearing an ordinance to increase the ceiling on cess to 25 per cent from the present 15 per cent over the peak rate of 28 per cent Goods and Services Tax (GST) on such vehicles. The approval came at a Union Cabinet meeting chaired by PM Narendra Modi. According to the proposed ordinance that seeks to amend the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, 2017, the maximum compensation cess can be raised to 25 per cent.The decision to increase the cess on mid-size and large vehicles would be taken by the GST Council, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said. Earlier this month, the GST Council had recommended an amendment to increase the cess on all passenger vehicles with length above 4 m and engine capacity of 1,500 cc and above. Such vehicles currently attract GST of 28 per cent, besides a 15 per cent cess. The council is expected to take the final decision on September 9 and also decide the date from when the increased cess will be applicable. The move will adversely impact Mahindra & Mahindra, Toyota and luxury car makers such as Mercedes, BMW, Audi and JLR, the managements of which have already opposed such a move. The decision is also likely to impact the growth plans of the luxury car industry, which saw a flat performance in 2016, due to demonetisation and a ban on 2,000 cc diesel cars in the National Capital Region for the first eight months of the year. Most such vehicles had turned significantly cheaper after the introduction of GST on July 1. Toyota’s Fortuner turned cheaper by Rs 2.17 lakh and Innova by Rs 1 lakh. Most luxury cars had also turned cheaper by as much as 8-10 per cent.The objective cannot be such that luxury items become cheaper, the minister said. He said the issue of increase in effective rate of compensation cess on motor vehicles would be examined by the council in due course. The highest pre-GST tax incidence on motor vehicles worked out to about 52-54.72 per cent, to which 2.5 per cent was added on account of Central Sales Tax, octroi, etc. Against this, the total tax incidence came to 43 per cent after GST implementation.