As the Indian consumers' market gears up for a festive season to kick in and sales to boost; VIjay Sales ' MD Nilesh gupta, in an interview to, explains what the market demand is like at the current moment and what the scenario might be like as newer GST rates on electronics starts being implemented. Edited excerpts:No, not all. In fact what we have seen is on 15th August also we did the same numbers what we had done last year and just imagine in June we had one Diwali, so in spite of that I think GST impact will not be there. The market and the business will be as usual like every year.As I said it was real Diwali figure. In fact in June, 2017 we crossed the Diwali 2016 numbers which is unheard of in the history of electronics.Yes, there will be growth. What has happened in July, August and September we (5:12) were stay put, there was not growth and that was expected but now onwards I think the growth will come in. And another one major factor which is there is if you see there is a slew of mobile phones launches, tomorrow we have Xiaomi A1 launch, then we have a Note 8 launch by Samsung and the Apple the entire phones are coming in, I think that itself will make people go in for the buying spree and once the mindset goes for buying. So if he is going to buy a mobile he is going to upgrade to televisions also, to refrigerators also.See what has happened is in June whatever consumer would have bought would either have been a television or a refrigerator, nobody would have bought everything at one go so possibly this Diwali he will buy something else. The idea is-- and this Diwali we expect the high end products to go very well, especially the OLED TVs because they were priced very high. Last year what was priced at 7-10 lakhs, this year it has come between three to five lakhs. So I think the premium segment is going to do very well.See the June pricing was once in a life time pricing, unless and until GST 2 comes in, in the next two three years something like that it will never come again. So I think the consumers also understand that and the biggest part is the festive season is there, people are going to be in the buying mode and the best part about consumer durable now is nobody buys cash up front, they are buying on finance. So then I think a 2-3-4% up and down does not matter to them.See I think as a category Diwali traditionally is a appliance category but the biggest surprise which I expect is the panels, the LED televisions. The LED televisions for the simple reason is there is a lot of action going on in that segment and especially the large screens, 55 and above. So what last year we did not see I think this year that is going to be the biggest surprise.But in LED television that is the beauty of the LED, even at a distance of 10 feet you can watch 75 inches because the clarity is there and coupled with your online programs which are available in full HD and 4k, I think that is the one category we should look out for this Diwali.Yes, they do. They definitely use the second screen and the second screen is what propels them to buy a larger screen because when they are watching good content they say, boss the screen is too small and I need a big screen and now they do not want a 40-inch, they want a 65 and 75 inches screen.
