Mumbai, July 2: The consumers will have to shell out more for the ready-to-move-in flats under the GST system as developers with large unsold inventories are planning to pass on the higher tax burden to home-buyers. However, the new flats will cost less, giving some breather to the developers of upcoming projects. Under GST, the effective tax on under-construction projects has gone up to 12 per cent, which is an increase of 6.5 per cent. The actual GST rate is 18 per cent on realty, but allows one-third of the tax to be deducted from the land value, from the total cost charged by the developer. The GST gives an option of getting full input set-off credit, which is not applicable on ready-to-move-in flats and as a result, developers will have to bear the burden of higher tax or pass on to the end-consumers or increase the overall prices to match the new tax burden, say developers. While developers might still get some benefits for projects that are in nascent stages, they will have to bear the tax burden for the ready-to-move-in projects since they are kept out of the GST ambit, House of Hiranandani Chairman and Managing Director Surendra Hiranandani said. Gera Developments Managing Director Rohit Gera said under the GST regime, tax on under construction projects would be 12 per cent, an increase of 6.5 per cent for buyers.There is an option of getting full input set-off credit on all input side if GST is paid by them, but this is not applicable on ready-to-move-in properties, he said.As a result, developers will either have to bear the burden of the tax since it cannot be passed on to the end consumers or the rates of apartments that are ready-to-occupy will increase to the extent of the taxes, Gera said. Vinod S Menon, CEO of Bengaluru-based mid-market developer Citrus Ventures, says everybody talks about the positives that GST brings in. But the devil lies in the details and no one seems to have any clarity on that. Menon said though one-third deduction makes the effective rate 12 per cent, with current effective VAT plus service tax rate being nine per cent, there is still a three per cent incremental charge. Since no retrospective claim of credits is possible, this will be a bone of contention between customer and developer as to who will bear this, he said. Coupled with the new regulator Rera, GST will increase paperwork and thus the overall cost, Menon said. However, Knight Frank India Chairman Shishir Baijal said like the note-ban, GST would trigger some momentary disturbances but augur well for the industry in the long term. The intention of GST is to bring in efficiency in the entire tax system, and its implementation will see some teething issues. But eventually it will pave the way for an extremely efficient tax system for the country,he said. Echoing similar views, SILA founder and MD Sahil Vora said there will be pain and forced consolidation in the sector, but in the long-run everybody will benefit. But the affordable housing sector is happy as there is no tax on it. Since almost 70 per cent of the market caters to the middle to high income segment, GST could shift focus, particularly of smaller developers towards high volume, low to medium income segment,RICS Global’s Sachin Sandhir said. Anarock Property Consultants Chairman Anuj Puri said the affordable housing sector will not be impacted by GST as there will be no tax under GST for affordable housing scheme. CBRE South Asia’s Ram Chandnani said GST will also attract international residential investment as it has been seen globally that a unified tax structure has been one of the many catalysts for increased investments. Additionally, sectors ancillary to real estate will see improved supply chain efficiency with the removal of various federal tax barriers and creation of a common market, accelerating the delivery of goods, he noted. Atul Chordia of Panchshil Realty said they have only completed or near-ready projects which will be paying 12 per cent GST on the cost of construction. The effective 12 per cent tax is higher than the industry as we tend to use best-in-industry material, much of which will fall under the 28 per cent slab leading to higher overall cost, Chordia said. India Ratings maintains a negative outlook for the real estate sector for FY18, on expectation of a continued slump in sale of residential units. This will lead to continued negative cash flows since FY14 and a further increase in already-high debt levels, resulting in weakening of the sector’s credit profile. Rohit Jain, a partner at law firm Economic Laws Practice, said there isn’t enough clarity on transitional provisions under GST, whether it pertains to credit of inventory, credit on unsold stock or the tax implications where part payments are made under the pre-GST and part under the new taxation system.
The country’s largest two-wheeler maker Hero MotoCorp has reduced prices of its mass selling models by up to Rs 1,800 to pass on GST benefits to its customers. The quantum of reduction ranges from Rs 400 to Rs 1,800 on mass-selling models, the company said in a statement. The actual benefit varies from state to state, depending on the pre- and post-GST rates, it added. Some of the premium segment models would see a reduction of up to Rs 4,000 in certain markets, Hero MotoCorp said. In one or two states, such as Haryana, where the pre-GST rates were lower than the post-GST rate, the prices of a few models may go up marginally, it added. The company sells a range of bikes priced between Rs 40,000 and Rs 1.1 lakh. Earlier on Saturday, car makers Maruti Suzuki, Toyota Kirloskar, JLR and BMW reduced prices in the range of Rs 2,300 to over Rs 2 lakh of different models to pass on to consumers the benefit of lower tax incidence under the GST regime. Maruti Suzuki India (MSI) slashed prices of most of its models by up to 3 per cent with immediate effect except for diesel versions of sedan Ciaz and MPV Ertiga with mild hybrid technology, which saw increase in prices by over Rs 1 lakh.
New Delhi, July 2: The Seventh Pay Commission and implementation of GST has put inflation in an uncertain zone, and prices are expected to rise temporarily, says an HSBC report. Both GST and HRA increase have kicked in from July 1 and though the pay commission allowances are likely to bump up inflation, the Reserve Bank is expected to cut repo rate by 25 bps in its August meeting. The HSBC report said as the centre implements HRA increase, headline inflation is likely to rise by about 65 bps for a year and if the states follow suit and implement the increase as one block, inflation would rise by another 65 bps. However, if the centre implements the HRA immediately and the states in a staggered manner over two years, then inflation would rise quickly at first, but would go back to the 4 per cent target in 2019, as the statistical impact fades. On the contrary, the report said, GST is expected to help lower inflation by 10-50 bps over time The tax rates have been set such that, if over time tax cuts are passed on to final consumers, and the input tax credit mechanism works smoothly, the GST could actually lower inflation by 10-50 bps, the report said. Regarding RBI’s policy stance, HSBC expects a 25 bps cut in repo rate in the August meeting. our assessment is that once the statistical impact wears off, inflation will return to 4 per cent handle in 2019, we continue to expect the RBI to cut the repo rate by 25 bps in the August meeting,HSBC said.On the fiscal front, the allowances are likely to cost the centre 0.1 per cent of GDP more than budgeted in 2017-18, HSBC said adding that for now this could be managed with cuts elsewhere. The Union Cabinet on June 28 approved recommendations of Seventh Pay Commission with 34 modifications which will impose an additional annual burden of Rs 30,748 crore on the exchequer. The increased allowances are based on the recommendations of the Committee on Allowances (CoA). PTI
