Indian markets rejoiced at the far- reaching tax reform GST, sending the benchmark Sensex higher by over 300 points -- its biggest single-day surge in a month -- on emergence of a big rally in FMCG and auto counters. The across-the-board buying helped the BSE flagship index close at a fresh one-week high of 31,221.62 and took the broader Nifty to finish 94 points higher at 9,615. Overall business sentiment was buoyed by expectations that the implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) will provide the much needed stimulant to the country's economic growth by transforming the earlier multi-pronged indirect taxation into a 'one nation one tax' system. "Market welcomed the new tax regime with a positive note while shrugging off the initial hiccups of investors during the last couple of weeks where market witnessed consolidation. Spending is likely to increase due to the impact of lower tax and increased sales volume will continue to benefit the earnings potential in the future," Vinod Nair, Head of Research, Geojit Financial Services Ltd, said. The biggest tax reform since independence, the GST, was launched by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and catapults India into a select league of nations that have a single national sales tax. Instilling optimism among investors, Moody's said the GST implementation will be positive for India's rating as it will lead to higher GDP growth and increased tax revenue. Robust capital inflows from foreign institutional investors (FIIs) and positive global cues further supported the momentum. Shares of the fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) firms led the rally, followed by telecom, metal, realty and auto counters. Cigarette maker ITC was the top gainer in Sensex, rising 5.70 per cent to end at a 52-week high. This is mostly because taxation for cigarettes under the GST is around 5-6 per cent lower than the previous tax structure. The 30-share Sensex resumed with a gap-up at 31,156.04 and touched a high of 31,258.33 and a low of 31,017.11 before concluding at 31,221.62, showing a smart rise of 300.01 points or 0.97 per cent. Similarly, the NSE 50-share Nifty also finished with a solid gain of 94.10 points at 9,615 after briefly reclaiming a high of 9,624.00. Foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) sold shares worth a net Rs 160.48 crore last Friday, as per provisional data. Domestic institutional investors (DIIs) bought shares worth a net Rs 1,195.71 crore last Friday.
Passing on to customers the benefits under the new GST regime, automakers today announced price cuts ranging from Rs 350 in case of two-wheelers to Rs 3 lakh on Ford’s SUV Endeavour. Honda Cars India, Ford as well as two-wheeler makers TVS Motor Company, Honda Motorcycle & Scooter India and Suzuki Motorcycle  all announced rate cuts arising out of the introduction of Goods and Services Tax from July 1. With the overall tax incidence on many of its car models coming down under GST, Honda Cars India Ltd (HCIL) cut prices by up to Rs 1.31 lakh with immediate effect to pass on the benefit to consumers. The company reduced price of its hatchback Brio by up to Rs 12,279 and that of compact sedan Amaze by up to Rs 14,825. Besides, it has slashed price of premium hatchback Jazz by up to Rs 10,031 and that of its recently launched model WR-V by up to Rs 10,064. Likewise, price of mid-sized sedan City has been reduced in the range of Rs 16,510 and Rs 28,005. The company’s SUV BR-V prices will come down by up to Rs 30,387. Its premium SUV CR-V has also seen a price drop of up to Rs 1,31,663. The revised prices are for ex-showroom Delhi and will vary from state to state. HCIL, however, is yet to decide on the revised pricing of Accord Hybrid, which is set to become costlier with GST rates on hybrid vehicles going up. Ford India has also reduced vehicle prices by up to 4.5% with immediate effect. While the reduction in prices will vary from state to state, the highest cut will be in Mumbai with the company’s flagship SUV Endeavour becoming cheaper by up to Rs 3 lakh. In Mumbai, the prices will go down in the range of Rs 28,000 on Figo to Rs 3 lakh on Endeavour. In the two-wheeler segment, TVS Motor Company has reduced prices of its models by up to Rs 4,150. The price reduction is in the range of Rs 350 to Rs 1,500 in the commuter segment. In the premium segment products, the prices are reduced up to Rs 4,150 depending on each state,TVS Motor Company said. Another two-wheeler maker Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India said it has slashed prices of its products by up to Rs 5,500 depending on model and state. Suzuki Motorcycle India and Yamaha have also reduced prices passing on GST benefit to customers. Market leader Hero MotoCorp has also cut prices by up to Rs 1,800 banking on the GST launch. Various automakers such as Maruti Suzuki, Toyota Jaguar Land Rover, BMW, Mercedes-Benz and Audi have already reduced prices post GST implementation.
Textile traders today protested against the GST here and allegedly pelted policemen with stones, forcing the law enforcement personnel to baton charge, a senior official said. The traders came out in thousands on the Ring Road and chanted slogans like "GST hatao, saral tax lao" (remove GST and bring in a simple tax). The protest was held in support of an indefinite bandh called by the GST Sangharsh Samiti against Goods and Services Tax on textiles. The police wielded batons to disperse the agitators who allegedly engaged in stone-pelting. "We had to resort to lathi charge after some protesters pelted the policemen with stones, injuring one personnel," Surat Police Commissioner Satish Sharma said. The traders, however, maintained that they were protesting peacefully. They alleged that the police action came unprovoked as the administration was working at the behest of the ruling BJP's Lok Sabha member from Surat, C R Patil, who held a meeting with traders yesterday. They said some traders sided with Patil after the meeting yesterday, and decided to keep their shops open against the indefinite bandh called by the protesting association. "Some traders had yesterday met Patil who asked them to open shops and promised to provide them police security against those who insisted on continuing with the indefinite bandh. The police started beating up the protesting traders even when they were carrying out their protest peacefully," trader Gaurav Shrimali alleged. Reacting to police's action, senior Congress leader and Rajya Sabha member Ahmed Patel tweeted, "Shocking that police has used brutal force against Surat traders protesting against GST. Govt must reason with them, not suppress them." The GST Sangharsh Samiti called for an indefinite bandh yesterday in Surat textile market, which is one of the largest in the country. The traders are protesting the imposition of five per cent GST on textiles. Several cloth markets in the state remained closed as most traders have not registered for the new tax system and do not have the GST number. They are hoping that the central government will come out with some solution to the 5% GST. 
The GST feel-good went some notches higher as the Sensex rallied 132 points on Tuesday--bringing up gains for the fourth straight day--with metal, banking and realty stocks ticking all the right boxes. Asian cues offered hope, backed by a record close in the US, which emboldened investors. The 30-share index was up 131.84 points, or 0.42 per cent, at 31,353.46. Sectoral indices led by metal, realty, power, consumer durables, oil and gas, auto and banking made headway. The gauge had gained 387.30 points in the previous three sessions making a strong bet on the Goods and Services Tax (GST). The NSE Nifty on Tuesday went up 35.65 points, or 0.37 per cent, to 9,650.65. Prominent gainers were Reliance Industries, Adani Ports, Tata Motors, ICICI Bank and ONGC, rising by up to 1.61 per cent. NTPC too rose 1.02 per cent to Rs 158.20 on reports of the company considering bonus shares issue. Japan’s Nikkei was up 0.43 per cent while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index rose 0.05 per cent in morning trade. Shanghai composite, however, shed 0.49 per cent. The US Dow Jones Industrial Average ended at record high by rising 0.61 per cent on Monday.
