Clarifying on the meaning of registered brand name in the context of GST rates, the government has said the 5% GST rate will apply only on those branded cereals which are registered with the Register of Trade Marks, while others will remain exempted. The government clarification comes as doubts were being raised over the meaning of registered brand name. GST rate of 5% will not be applicable on the supply of goods unless the brand name or trade name is actually on the Register of Trade Marks and is in force under the Trade Marks Act, 1999, the Finance Ministry has said. The Central GST (CGST) rate on supply of certain goods, such as ‘’paneer’’, natural honey, wheat, rice and other cereals, pulses, flour of cereals and pulses, other than those put up in unit container and bearing a registered brand name is nil. Supply of such goods, when put up in unit container and bearing a registered brand name attracts 2.5% CGST rate,it said.
BRIEFLY No-frills airline IndiGo on Thursday said it plans to start low-cost long haul international flights and is focused narrowly on buying Air India’s overseas operations. Little over a week after expressing its interest in buying out the operations of debt-laden Air India, IndiGo’s founders  Rahul Bhatia and Rakesh Gangwal  laid out the airline’s long term plans to capitalise on the untapped international air transportation opportunities provided by India. PTI Retirement fund body EPFO is likely to announce the interest rate on PF deposits for this fiscal at its trustee meeting slated for next month. The Employees Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) had lowered the rate of return for it’s over 4.5 crore subscribers to 8.65% for 2016-17, from 8.8% in 2015-16. Gold prices tumbled by Rs 290 to trade at six-week low of Rs 28,930 per 10 grams at the bullion market on Thursday amid a weak trend overseas and slump in demand from local jewellers. Silver followed suit and fell by Rs 200 to Rs 38,500 per kg. Pension fund regulator PFRDA has launched a 15-day campaign across the country to promote the government’s flagship social security scheme National Pension System (NPS).  Automakers Nissan, Skoda and Isuzu Motors have reduced prices of passenger vehicles in India by up to Rs 2.4 lakh to pass on GST benefit to customers. Similarly, Tata Motors has also cut prices of its commercial vehicles, while Bajaj Auto’s Austrian arm KTM dropped prices of its sports bikes in the country. PTI
