The government today clarified that education would not become expensive under Goods and Services Tax (GST). No change has been made in any subject related to education in the GST era, except to reduce tax rate on certain items of education such as school bags. Some input services like transport and canteen provided by private players to educational institutions were subject to service tax in pre-GST era and the same is being continued in the GST regime. Schooling up to higher secondary and most of the services provided to educational institutions are exempt from taxation, the government said today. Denying reports that education would become costlier under GST, an official statement said mid-day meal scheme as well as security, cleaning and housekeeping services performed in educational institutions up to higher secondary are also exempt from GST. Also, services relating to admission and examination up to higher secondary are exempt from GST.There is no change made in any subject relating to education in the GST era, except to reduce tax rate on certain items of education such as school bags etc, a Finance Ministry statement said. Services provided by an educational institution to students, faculty and staff are exempt which include pre-school education and education up to higher secondary school or equivalent.
FMCG major Colgate-Palmolive (India) on Saturday said it had reduced prices of toothpastes and toothbrushes by 8-9 per cent to pass on the GST benefits to consumers. The revised prices are effective for all shipments from July 1, the Colgate-Palmolive (India) Ltd (CPIL) said in a statement. GST has enabled Colgate-Palmolive (India) Ltd to extend to its consumers the benefits of reduction in MRPs by 8 to 9 per cent, for the key categories of toothpastes and toothbrushes, the company said in a statement. CPIL is working with its trade partners to facilitate an orderly transition in prices.The revised prices are effective for all shipments starting July 1, it added. FMCG firms are extending the tax benefits under the new GST regime to customers either by reducing the prices or by increasing the weight of the product while keeping the price unchanged. The GST council has put daily usage goods as bathing soap, hair oil, detergent powder, soap, tissue papers and napkins under 18 per cent tax slab, while detergents and fizzy beverages like Coke and Pepsi are placed under 28 per cent tax bracket.
