Consumer Price Inflation (CPI) touched a ‘historically low’ level of 1.54% in June, which the government said such low level of inflation was last seen way back in 1999 and before that in August 1978. The number of 1.54% is historically low and reflects the firm and ongoing consolidation of macro-economic stability, Chief Economic Adviser Arvind Subramanian said today. The last time we saw such inflation according to slightly different series, CPI (IW) — was in 1999 and before that in August 1978, he added. The Chief Economic Adviser said there is a paradigm shift in the inflationary process to low levels of inflation. In an apparent dig at the RBI, he added that this shift has been missed by all and is reflected in large, one sided and systematic inflation forecast errors that have been made. Stopping short of asking for a rate cut, Subramanian said this low inflation number and latest IIP data is something that all policymakers will reflect upon very carefully. The reference on errors in inflation forecasting comes as an oblique criticism of RBI which has been holding interest rates, citing inflation risks and the latest number comes as a vindication for the government. The government is also claiming credit for historically low inflation numbers as its progress on macro-economic consolidation. With the latest numbers on inflation, analysts are sticking their neck out for a 25 basis points cut on August 2. Deutsche Bank Research said in a note, We are changing our rate call post the release of the June CPI inflation data. Earlier, we were expecting the central bank to maintain an extended pause. We now expect RBI to cut the policy rate by 25 bps on August 2, thereby pushing the repo rate down to 6%. Since April, CPI inflation has been surprising to the downside and the June inflation print came at 1.5%, which is 50 bps below the lower band of RBI’s mandated target of maintaining inflation within the 2-6% band, it said. Devendra Kumar Pant, Chief Economist, India Ratings, said the IIP growth of 1.7% for May shows that the industrial sector is still not out of trouble. It appears that the demonetisation woes still persist, consumer durables had contracted sixth consecutive month in May. Aditi Nayar, Principal Economist, ICRA, said industrial growth slipped for the second month in a row to a lacklustre 1.7% in May, reflecting an unfavorable base effect and pre-GST inventory curtailment.We are changing our rate call post the release of the June CPI inflation data. Earlier, we were expecting the central bank to maintain an extended pause. We now expect RBI to cut the policy rate by 25 bps on August 2, thereby pushing the repo rate down to 6%.
The government on Thursday issued three clarifications on GST applicability on sale of old jewellery, housing societies/RWA and hostel accommodation to clarify the status. It has clarified that sale of old jewellery by an individual to a jeweller will not make the jeweller liable to pay 3 per cent GST under reverse charge mechanism (RCM) on such purchases. However, if an unregistered supplier of gold ornaments sells it to registered supplier, the tax under RCM will apply. In the ‘GST Ki Master Class’ held yesterday, in one of the replies given to an on-the-spot question, it was informed that "purchase of old gold jewellery by a jeweller from a consumer will be subject to GST at 3 per cent under reverse charge mechanism in terms of the provisions contained in Section 9(4) of the CGST Act, 2017". On further examination, it is felt that the issue needs to be clarified, the government said. Even though the sale of old gold by an individual is for a consideration, it cannot be said to be in the course or furtherance of his business (as selling old gold jewellery is not the business of the said individual), and hence does not qualify to be a supply per se. Accordingly, the sale of old jewellery by an individual to a jeweller will not attract the provisions of Section 9(4) and jeweller will not be liable to pay tax under reverse charge mechanism on such purchases, the government said. It clarified that services provided by the Housing Society Resident Welfare Association (RWA) will not become expensive under GST as there is no change made to services provided by the housing society (RWA) to its members in the GST regime. The supply of service by RWA (unincorporated body or a registered non-profit entity) to its own members by way of reimbursement of charges or share of contribution up to an amount of Rs 5,000 per month per member for providing services and goods for the common use of its members in a housing society or a residential complex are exempt fromGST. Further, if the aggregate turnover of such RWA is up to Rs 20 lakh in a financial year, then such supplies would be exempted from GST even if charges per member are more than Rs 5,000. The RWA shall be required to pay GST on monthly subscription/contribution charged from its members if such subscription is more than Rs 5,000 per member and the annual turnover of RWA by way of supplying of services and goods is also Rs 20 lakh or more. It also clarified that no GST is levied on annual subscription and fees charged as lodging and boarding charges by educational institutions from its students for hostel accommodation. Services provided by an educational institution to students, faculty and staff are fully exempt from GST.
