The Revenue Department today clarified that sale of old jewellery and old vehicles by individuals will not attract any GST as the sale is not for furthering any business. Clarifying on Revenue Secretary Hasmukh Adhia’s comments yesterday, the department issued a press statement saying it was informed at GST Master Class yesterday that purchase of old gold jewellery by a jeweller from a consumer will be subject to GST at the rate of 3% under reverse charge mechanism in terms of the provisions contained in Section 9(4) of the Central GST Act, 2017. It then went on to state that the said section has to be read in conjunction with another section and even though the sale of old gold by an individual is for a consideration, it cannot be said to be in the course or furtherance of his business (as selling old gold jewellery is not the business of the said individual), and hence does not qualify to be a supply per se. Accordingly, the sale of old jewellery by an individual to a jeweller will not attract the provisions of Section 9(4) and jeweller will not be liable to pay tax under reverse charge mechanism (RCM) on such purchases, it said. The Revenue Department officials said the same principle will apply on sale of old cars or two-wheelers and no GST will be payable even though the supply would be for a consideration. The statement said Section 9(4) of the said Act mandates that tax on supply of taxable goods (gold in this case) by an unregistered supplier (an individual in this case) to a registered person (the jeweller in this case) will be paid by the registered person (the jeweller in this case) under reverse charge mechanism. But since the sale is not in consideration for the furtherance of business no tax will apply. It, however, said the tax would apply if an unregistered business sells gold ornaments to registered supplier. However, if an unregistered supplier of gold ornaments sells it to registered supplier, the tax under RCM will apply, it added. A supplier is defined as the one who buys or sells in furtherance of his business.
The government today clarified that services provided by the housing society Resident Welfare Association (RWA) will not become expensive under GST as there is no change made to services provided by the RWA to its members in the GST regime. The supply of service by RWA (unincorporated body or a registered non-profit entity) to its own members by way of reimbursement of charges or share of contribution up to an amount of Rs 5,000 per month per member for providing services and goods for the common use of its members in a housing society or a residential complex are exempt from GST. Further, if the aggregate turnover of such RWA is up to Rs 20 lakh in a financial year, then such supplies would be exempted from GST even if charges per member are more than Rs 5,000. The RWA shall be required to pay GST on monthly subscription or contribution charged from its members if such subscription is more than Rs 5,000 per member and the annual turnover of RWA by way of supplying of services and goods is also Rs 20 lakh or more. It also clarified that no GST is levied on annual subscription and fees charged as lodging and boarding charges by educational institutions from its students for hostel accommodation.
The Goods and Services Tax (GST) would severely dent the liquidity situation of traders and the compliance cost of merchant exporters might go up, top exporter body FIEO said on Friday. According to the Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO), export competitiveness of domestic players may fall by about 2 per cent due to liquidity problems. FIEO Director General Ajay Sahai said the government was looking into various options to neutralise the effect of GST regime. GST will severely dent the liquidity of the exporter in a big way and the compliance cost of the merchant exporter may go up. Export competitiveness of India may tank by about 2 per cent and this will be a big blow to exporters, he said in a statement. FIEO President Ganesh Kumar Gupta termed GST as a path-breaking reform, but it will bear fruit in the long run, with initial hiccups. He explained that the liquidity problem of the exporters, delays in initial returns for exports in July and August, procedural issues in bonds were being flagged by FIEO with the officials concerned. The issues were discussed in Mumbai on Thursday. Before GST, exporters used to get ab-initio exemptions from duties. But they have to pay first and then seek refund. Due to this process, the FIEO stated that about Rs 1,85,000 crore would get stuck with the government.
The initial procedural and software glitches of Goods and Services Tax have smoothen a lot, Calcutta Freight Brokers Association said on Friday. Initially, there were lots of problems with procedural issues since GST was rolled out from July 1. There were problems in generating shipping bills. But a lot had been eased and now export consignments has also picked up now, Calcutta Freight Brokers Association chairman Rajiv Agarwall said here on the sidelines of the 79th AGM. We hope GST will bring in benefits in the long run but we have to wait to see whether the new taxation regime will help us, former CFBA chairman Bharat Jain said. Jain said, Exporters are not happy with the imposition of 5 per cent GST on ocean freight which was exempted earlier. This will lock up working capital. Exporters are also facing confusion on GST on exports of SEZ cargo. Agarwall said draft remains problem for Kolkata Port and after Dhamra Port begins container cargo there is a risk of flight of cargo.
