The government today ruled out cutting tax rates for the textiles sector, saying a zero per cent GST on fabrics will break the input tax credit chain for the domestic industry and make imported items cheaper. Amid protests in Gujarat by textile traders who are demanding rollback of 5% GST on fabrics, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said it is not correct to say that textiles sector was never taxed in independent India. In fact, during 2003-04, the entire textiles sector was subjected to central excise duty, he said in a written reply to a question in the Rajya Sabha. Generally, the GST rates are equal or lower than the pre-GST tax incidence. And therefore, the price of fabrics is not likely to go up, he said. Under the GST regime, yarn and fibres made from silk, wool, cotton or other vegetable fibres attract 5% tax. While garments and made-up clothings costing less than Rs 1,000 attract 5% and those exceeding Rs 1,000 attract 12% levy. Yarns made of man-made fibre or filament attract 18% GST, while the same is 5% for fabrics. Jaitley said the GST rate structure for the textiles sector enables ease of classification and determination of rate. The main demand of the textile trader is not to put any tax on fabrics, Jaitley said as he shot down the demand by saying that nil GST on fabrics will break the input tax credit chain and then the garments/made ups manufacturers will not be able to get the credit of tax on previous stages. Also nil GST on fabrics will result in zero rating of imported fabrics, while domestic fabrics will continue to bear the burden of input taxes, he said. Jaitley further said necessary steps have been taken to facilitate taxpayers to take GST registration. GST Sewa Kendras have been set up in various centres to handhold the taxpayers and to provide all necessary guidance regarding GST compliance. In reply to a separate query, Minister of State for Finance Santosh Kumar Gangwar said the GST rates were decided taking into account the pre-GST indirect taxes incidence on goods and service. With the GST rates so notified the tax incidence on items like foodgrain, milk, egg, sugar, vegetable edible oils, spices in GST regime is lower than the tax incidence in the pre-GST regime  he said. With regard to GST rate on pesticides, Gangwar said prior to GST pesticides attracted excise duty of 12.5% in addition to average VAT rate of 4%. Also there were taxes such as CST, entry tax, octroi, etc. The GST rate on pesticides is 18%. Thus, the total tax incidence pre-GST and post-GST has not changed significantly, so as to impact the prices of pesticides, in general and the interest of farmers in particular, Gangwar said.
Retreating from its record high hit in the previous session, the BSE Sensex today sank about 364 points to post its biggest single-day plunge in eight months, dragged by FMCG giant ITC whose shares fell nearly 13% due to increased levies on cigarettes. The NSE Nifty also cracked about 89 points to slip below the psychological 9,900-mark. Cigarette major ITC emerged as the worst performer after its stock dived 12.63% to Rs 284.60 following the GST Council’s decision to hike cess on cigarettes by 48.50 paise to 79.20 paise per stick. Other cigarette stocks were Godfrey Phillips and VST Industries also tanked by up to 7.83%. The market sentiment was also impacted by mixed global cues as setbacks for a healthcare overhaul in the US raised doubts over prospects for a range of reforms backed by President Donald Trump. The 30-share Sensex, after opening lower at 31,775.54, reached an intra-day high of 31,911.61. The index, however, slipped as the day progressed and touched a low of 31,626.44 during the day. It finally settled at 31,710.99, down 363.79 points. 
The government has clarified that any hotel, including five-star hotels, having a declared tariff of less than Rs 7,500 per day will attract GST at 18%. The Finance Ministry said reports have been received expressing doubts whether 5-star hotels are liable to pay GST at 28% irrespective of the declared tariff of a unit of accommodation.
