The historic 10,000 level proved to be short-lived today as the Nifty closed with a negative bias and the Sensex lost from its lifetime high after investors went for profit in recent gainers. The NSE benchmark made history breaching the 10,000-mark for the first time by hitting an all-time high of 10,011.30 at the outset, led by stronger-than-expected earnings by blue chips and continuous buying by foreign funds and domestic institutions. But a wave of profit-booking dragged the gauge down by 1.85 points, or 0.02%, to settle at 9,964.55. Steady monsoon progress and smooth GST takeoff had helped both the key indices scale historic highs, traders said. The flagship Sensex climbed to a fresh life high of 32,374.30 before closing down 17.60 points, or 0.05%, at 32,228.27. In the past two trading sessions, the key barometer had gained 341.47 points. Market made a historical day by touching 10k supported by better earnings from blue chips and strong liquidity. However, profit booking at higher levels pulled the market to mild correction due to psychological effect, muted Q1 results for midcaps and awaiting Fed monetary policy meet, said Vinod Nair, Head of Research, Geojit Financial Services. Participants also looked up to US Federal Reserve policy meeting later today. Key indices in the Asian region lay low. Major losers include Lupin 1.96%, along with Tata Motors, Coal India and Sun Pharma. Airtel surged 1.76% after reports of the government considering giving telecom companies more time to pay for the spectrum they bought, in a bid to ease sectoral stress.
As per rules, traders and small retailers having turnover less than Rs 20 lakh don’t need to have a GST number However, wholesalers in Ambala and Delhi have refused to take orders from small traders in the absence of GST number Though Prime Minister Narendra Modi hailed GST as a good and simple tax and said it is aimed at ending harassment of small businesmen, in reality, it is not so. Small traders, especially those having turnover less than Rs 20 lakh, are being harassed by wholesalers. The wholesalers in Delhi and Ambala are not willing to sell products to them. Call it a confusion or misinterpretation of GST, small traders in Punjab having turnover less than Rs 20 lakh are a harried lot, as the wholesalers in Delhi have refused to sell products to them in the absence of a GST number. However, according to rules, small retailers having turnover less than Rs 20 lakh don’t need to have GST number. For Mohali-based Avatar Singh, life has never been worrisome ever since he has been in retailing business. Singh runs a cloth shop in Mohali and is having a turnover of less than Rs 20 lakh. These days he is not having any stock as the wholesalers in Delhi have refused to sell him stock as he doesn’t have a GST number. We are being harassed by the wholesalers. The PM had clearly said small retailers don’t need to have a GST number. However, the wholesalers are not ready to do business with us in the absence of GST number, he said. Dalbir Singh, another small trader from Punjab, said, I ventured into retailing of cloth last year thinking it’s a lucrative business. From past fortnight, I am out of stock as the wholesalers refused to do business with us. Vaibhav Jain, a wholesale merchant in Ambala, said, We were advised by our tax advisers not to deal with firms who don’t have GST number, so we are not accepting orders from them.
