Chandigarh, December 5: Punjab-based ice cream manufacturers, mainly in micro, small and medium category, have appealed to the Central government for putting the ice cream industry in the composition plan of GST. The manufacturers rue that high tax rate of 18% will hit the bottom lines of the units, leading to closure of the units. As per GST Regulations, ice cream, pan masala and tobacco manufacturers cannot opt for GST composition scheme under which businesses are allowed to pay lower tax rate. The state has 25-30 units in small and medium category with average turnover ranging from Rs 25 lakh to Rs 35 lakh and around 300 units in micro category. The decision of the GST Council, if not revoked, will be death knell to the micro, small and medium ice manufacturers in Punjab as we operate on thin margins, said Aryan Kapoor, executive in charge, Pun Ice cream Association. The decision of the government to compare ice cream with luxury and sinful products such as tobacco is illogical as ice cream is neither a luxury nor a harmful product but still kept out of GST composition plan, said Sandeep Kashyap, a Patiala-based manufacturer. They have also sought a reduction in the GST from 18 to 12% or lower, on a par with most other processed foods. The ice cream industry has been the torch-bearer for creating cold chain infrastructure and there is a cost attached to it as it increases the input cost, they added. Ice cream previously attracted 2% Central excise without Cenvat credit and 14.5% VAT in most states.
New Delhi, December 5: Services sector activity in India slipped into contraction territory during November, post the implementation of the Goods and Service Tax (GST) that led to sluggish demand and lower customer turnout, says a monthly survey. Posting below the no-change mark of 50 in November, the seasonally adjusted Business Activity Index signalled a contraction of the service sector for the first time in three months. In PMI lexicon, a print above 50 means expansion and a score below that denotes contraction. Business under performance emanated from July’s Goods and Services Tax (GST) which contributed to sluggish demand and lower customer turnout, according to anecdotal evidence, said Aashna Dodhia, Economist at IHS Markit and author of the report. Despite unfavourable demand conditions, service providers continued to add to their workforce numbers as the level of business sentiment in the services sector for the next 12 months rose at the strongest pace since July.
New Delhi, December 5:  Mid-term review of Foreign Trade Policy Scope of Merchandise Exports from India Scheme (MEIS) and Service Exports from India Scheme (SEIS) enhanced MEIS incentive raised for ready-made garments and made-ups by 2% (additional annual outgo Rs 2,743 crore) Across-the-board increase of 2% in existing MEIS for exports by MSMEs/labour-incentive industries (Rs 4,567 crore) Annual incentive increased by 34% to Rs 8,450 crore SEIS incentives raised by 2% with a view to boosting services sector exports (Rs 1,140 crore) Validity of Duty Credit Scrips increased from 18 months to 24 months New Logistics Division to promote integrated development of the logistics sector The mid-term review of the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) has announced enhanced benefits of Rs 8,450 crore to boost exports of the labour-intensive and MSME sectors to boost job creation and as part of a concerted handholding exercise for verticals that have been affected most by the twin disruptions of demonetisation and GST. The incentives have been increased by 33.8% or Rs 8,450 crore from the existing incentives of Rs 25,000 crore leading to boost in exports. Commerce and Industry Minister Suresh Prabhu said the FTP will focus on exports from labour-intensive and MSME sectors by way of increased incentives in order to increase employment opportunities. The mid-term review, Prabhu said, aims to promote exports by simplification of processes, enhancing support to high employment sectors, leveraging benefits of GST, promoting services exports, monitoring exports performance through state-of-the-art analytics. Export incentives under Merchandise Exports from India (MEIS) have been increased by 2% across the board for labour-intensive MSME sectors. Further, incentives under Services Exports from India Scheme (SEIS) have also been increased by 2%. This is in addition to the already announced increase in MEIS incentives from 2% to 4% for ready-made garments and made ups in the labour-intensive textiles sector.
