Chandigarh, December 7: With the GST rollout, lending to SMEs is likely to become simpler, faster and hassle-free, said SBI Managing Director (Retail & Digital Banking) PK Gupta here today. He said: With data of SMEs becoming easily available, banks will be able to make a better assessment of their funding requirements and cash flow situation before lending to them. At present, the lending to SMEs is mainly based on collaterals. At times, assessment of assets to ascertain cash flow can be misleading. On credit growth, he said retail credit offtake had been encouraging as compared to corporate lending because of stressed conditions. We are bullish on the retail segment as it is growing at around 14-15%. Overall, we anticipate a growth of 6%, he said. In the current fiscal, the bank expects retail loans will grow by around 16-18%. He said digital transactions had increased significantly after demonetisation and they were taking the digital route for customer interface and back-end processes to improve cost efficiency. Our branches handle 22% of transactions while the rest are carried out by digital means such as internet banking, mobile banking, ATMs, etc. The share of digital banking has risen above ATMs. Digital banking rose to 36% of total transactions during the year as against 26% in the previous year whereas the share of ATMs fell to 28% as compared to 43% a year ago,he said. On stressed assets, he said the bank had initiated proceedings against defaulters by moving to National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) to recover their dues. On being asked whether NCLT can be approached for all NPA cases, he said, The banks should use the best available mechanism to recover bad loans and the NCLT route cannot be used effectively in all the cases. Besides the NCLT, there are a lot of other mechanisms like RBI scheme which can be used to recover the bad loans. We advise our bankers to use the best available mechanisms. On customer services, Gupta said, We have launched various initiatives including innovative products to improve customers’ service and bank’s cost efficiency.Move to make compliance easier for small traders
New Delhi, December 8: Advisory panel’s recommendations Reverse charge mechanism should be abolished e-Way Bill should be deferred till 2019 Efforts may be made to bring some alternate method in place of e-Way Bill Inter-state transactions should be allowed in the composition scheme 1% tax in composition scheme for traders, manufacturers and restaurants A major revamp of GST regulations is on the cards making compliance easier for traders and small businesses with an advisory panel recommending as many as 100 changes in the report submitted to the government. Among the major recommendations by the GST Laws panel are reverse charge mechanism should be abolished, e-Way Bill should be deferred till 2019 and efforts may be made to bring some alternate method in place of e-Way Bill, inter-state transactions should be allowed in the composition scheme, 1% tax in composition scheme for traders, manufacturers and restaurants. Other recommendations include in place of all types of returns there should be one consolidated return, return process should be simplified and rationalised, input tax credit (ITC) should be released within the same month while matching and adjustment may be done later. The advisory group of the Law Review Committee was set up at the 23rd GST Council meeting on November 2. It has submitted its report to the Revenue Secretary. The recommendations of the Advisory Group have been referred to the Law Review Committee, consisting of senior officers of the central and the state governments, which, in turn, will examine these recommendations and take a final view. The next meeting of the Law Review Committee is scheduled to be held on December 13-14. The panel also recommended that the return should be filed quarterly but tax may be paid monthly, doing away with HSN code in the invoice for easier return filing, classification of items should be such that the raw material and finished product are in the same slab which would make refunds faster. It has also suggested that exempted or nil rated goods should not be counted in the aggregate turnover, all job work should be taxed at 5%, service providers should also be allowed to take composition scheme and revision in returns should be allowed. It has also recommended threshold exemption of Rs 20 lakh to all types of commission agents and relaxations to casual taxable person.
