New Delhi, December 15: The Asian Development Bank (ADB) today lowered India’s economic growth forecast for the current fiscal to 6.7% from 7%, citing lingering effect of demonetisation, transitory challenges to GST and weather-related risks to agriculture. For 2018-19, India’s GDP is projected to grow by 7.3%, slower than ADB’s previous estimate of 7.4%. The downgrade in projection comes weeks after Indian economy reversed a five-quarter slide in GDP growth to clock a 6.3% expansion in July-September. In its Asian Development Outlook Supplement, ADB said growth is expected to pick up in the remaining two quarters of the fiscal ending March 31, 2018, as the government implements measures to ease firms’ compliance with the new goods and services tax (GST). Growth would also be supported by government efforts to improve balance sheets of state-owned banks, in part through an augmented bank-recapitalisation programme  and a supportive global environment. However, owing to tepid growth in the first half of 2017-18, the lingering effects of demonetisation in November 2016, transitory challenges of a new tax system, and some risks to agriculture stemming from a spotty monsoon in 2017, the economic growth forecast has been lowered, it said. For the next fiscal, the projections have been revised down mainly because a faster recovery in crude oil prices likely in 2018 will add fiscal pressure, and because private investment growth is expected to remain soft, it said. ADB said inflation in India remained subdued in the first seven months of 2017-18, averaging 2.7%, with low food prices and demand still not out of the woods because of demonetisation. However, inflation has picked up since July 2017 on a price uptick for food, especially pulses and vegetables. Fuel prices also inched up in response to rising global crude oil prices, it said.
Chandigarh, December 15: Over 200 ginners of Punjab and Haryana will observe a one-day strike tomorrow against the imposition of reverse charge mechanism (RCM) on cotton under the GST. The ginners said the imposition of RCM on cotton is unjust as no other agri-commodity is charged under the reverse charge mechanism.
Bihar Dy CM Sushil Modi hints at reducing tax slabs
New Delhi, December 15: The GST Council in the coming months would aim to reduce the number of GST slabs and bring items like electricity, petroleum and real estate under the GST ambit, Bihar Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Modi said today. Addressing the Ficci AGM, the Bihar Deputy CM who also heads the Group of Ministers (GoM) set up to look at the IT challenges being faced under the GST, said electricity, real estate and petroleum products can be brought under the GST ambit once the revenue collection under the new regime stabilises. Electricity, real estate, stamp duty and petroleum products should become part of GST. This would be our (GST Council) endeavour, he said. He said it would be difficult to specify any timeline for this to happen. Inclusion of these can happen without amending the Constitution, he said. If petroleum products are brought under the GST regime, he said, it will attract the highest tax slab prevalent at that time and states would be at liberty to levy cess on it in order to protect their revenues. Both states and the Centre earn 40% of their revenue from petroleum products at present. He also hinted at the reduction of tax slabs going forward after tax collection stabilises. The current GST regime has five tax slabs 0%, 5%, 12%, 18% and 28%. An additional GST cess is also levied on certain products. Though final decision would be taken by the Council, he said, The possible scenario could be that the current highest tax slab of 28% could be brought down to 25% and two tax slabs of 12% and 18% could be merged into one.
New Delhi, December 15: The Union Cabinet today approved a Rs 2,600-crore special package for job creation in the leather and footwear sectors, both of which have seen a drop in exports and have been challenged by the disruptions of demonetisation and GST. It has the potential to generate 3.24 lakh new jobs in three years and assist in the formalisation of two lakh jobs. Apart from the financial outlay, it comes with tax sops and relaxation in labour laws to boost employment since the industry has a seasonal nature. The package involves implementation of central sector scheme Indian Footwear, Leather & Accessories Development Programme with an approved expenditure of Rs 2,600 crore over the three financial years from 2017-18 to 2019-20.
