Mumbai, February 1: Global rating agency Moody’s said the fiscal deficit projection of 3.3 per cent for FY19 is in line with its forecast and the target would be achieved. In the Budget, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley revised fiscal deficit estimates for the current financial year upwards at Rs 5.95 trillion or 3.5 per cent of GDP against the estimate of 3.3 per cent and also projected 3.3 per cent for FY19, up from the road-map of 3 per cent of GDP. The direction of fiscal deficit announced in the Budget is in line with our forecast. We expect that fiscal deficit targets will be broadly achieved, Moody’s said in a note on Thursday. A slower broadening of the tax base after the note-ban and GST implementation as well as weather-related impacts on crops could contribute to revenue slippage, it warned. Conversely, rapid rise in the number of taxpayers, albeit from a low base, could contribute to revenue growth more significantly than we currently expect,Moody’s said. Moody’s which has the best ratings on the country, expects revenue generation targets will be broadly achieved as the medium- to long-term benefits of GST and note ban reforms, including increasing the size of the formal economy, are realised over the next several years. Jaitley said he had been successively and successfully bringing down fiscal deficit. It was brought down to 4.1 per cent in FY15, further down to 3.9 per cent in FY16, and to a still lower 3.5 per cent in FY17. The agency expects the somewhat larger deficit than initially budgeted for fiscal 2018, at 3.5 per cent. This outcome, however, did not alter the longer-term trend towards fiscal consolidation, it said. It forecasts the debt-to-GDP ratio to be about 69 per cent in fiscal 2019, which incorporates our assessment of the deficit trends based on the announced budget. The high-debt burden remains a credit constraint for the sovereign, and is not expected to diminish rapidly because of the country’s low income levels leading to significant development spending needs and constraining the scope of tax base broadening. It said the continued focus to promote expenditure efficiency through rationalisation of government schemes and better-targeted delivery and re-asserted endorsements of the FRBM committee recommendations are credit positive. For fiscal 2019, Jaitley has set a disinvestment target of Rs 80,000 crore. This year’s divestments exceeding targets marks a break in a recent trend of missing ambitious targets, Moody’s said. Moving forward, increased divestments could contribute to higher government revenues, greater efficiencies within state-owned enterprises and help reduce the government’s high-debt burden, it said. The divestment target points to likely further consolidation of state owned oil and gas companies, it added.
New Delhi, February 1: Finance Miniser Arun Jaitley on Thursday projected a higher fiscal deficit of 3.5 per cent of the GDP for 2017-18, as against the target of 3.2 per cent, on account GST implementation and deferment of spectrum auction. The fiscal deficit or gap between total expenditure and revenues has been pegged at 3.3 per cent as against FRBM mandate of 3 per cent. As per the revised estimates presented by Jaitley in the Union Budget 2018-19, the net borrowing for the current fiscal was raised steeply to Rs 4.79 lakh crore as against the estimate of Rs 3.5 lakh crore. The government will borrow Rs 4.07 lakh crore from the market in 2018-19, around Rs 73,000 crore lower than the current fiscal. Referring to public finances, Jaitley said that in 2017- 18, the central government will be "receiving GST revenues only for 11 months, instead of 12 months". "This will have fiscal effect," he said. There has also been some shortfall in non-tax revenues on account of certain developments, including deferment of spectrum auction, he added. A part of this shortfall has been made up through higher direct tax revenues and bigger disinvestment receipts, Jaitley said. "Revised fiscal deficit estimates for 2017-18 are Rs 5.95 lakh crore at 3.5 per cent of GDP," he announced. As per the budget document, total revised estimates for expenditure in 2017-18 are Rs 21.57 lakh crore (net of GST compensation transfers to the states) as against the Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs 21.47 lakh crore. Later, at a press conference, Revenue Secretary Hasmukh Adhia said GST revenue collection will fall short by Rs 50,000 crore. Jaitley further said in order to impart unquestionable credibility to the government's commitment for the revised fiscal glide path, he would be accepting key recommendations of the Fiscal Reform and Budget Management Committee. The recommendations relate to adoption of the debt rule and to bring down the central government's debt to GDP ratio to 40 per cent. "Government has also accepted the recommendation to use fiscal deficit target as the key operational parameter," Jaitley said. Meanwhile, according to the Controller General of Accounts (CGA) the fiscal deficit at end of December 2017 worked out to be 113.6 per cent of the BE for 2017-18. In accutal terms, the deficit totals to Rs 6.20 lakh crore during the April-December period. The government has received Rs 10,78,006 crore or 67.4 per cent of the BE up to December 2017. The total expenditure works out to be Rs 16.98 lakh crore.
