New Delhi: Factory output grew unexpectedly in August to bring the country’s manufacturing sector back into growth zone on surge in new business orders after the GST-related contraction in July, a monthly survey showed on Friday. The Nikkei India Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) rebounded to 51.2 in August from a low of 47.9 in July. PTI
Mukesh Ranjan
New Delhi, September 2: Soon after taking charge at NITI Aayog as its second Vice-Chairman, noted economist Rajiv Kumar today asserted the days of elitist policy making is going to be over, while claiming that the second quarter growth is expected to soar to 7-7.5% on the back of good monsoon and clarity over GST. Stressing the need to formulate policies, which generate jobs, Dr Kumar said, Days of elitist policy framing are going to be over now. We need to develop our own models. That model will have to meet the critical task of creating employment opportunities. Dr Kumar also indicated that he favoured external advisers to join the policy body and he would like to work with groups of states to make the policy making participative and result oriented. Sounding confident that India’s economy will bounce back from the present dip in GDP growth, Dr Kumar said, In the next quarter (July-September quarter), the economy will grow by 7-7.5%. De-stocking, which was in anticipation of GST rollout, has completed and now, there is more clarity on the new tax regime.He said, Also, monsoon is good. Many IPOs are in the offing. FDI and FIIs are also increasing. Terming the issues related to farmer’s distress as real phenomena, not imaginary, he said, I am in favour of making agriculture more remunerative. And I also believe that the government should reduce interferences in the agriculture sector.
Financial analysts downgrade forecast for FY18
New Delhi, September 2: While several financial analysts downgraded the estimates for GDP in financial year 2018, the credit growth decline has also raised concerns about the economic growth in the country. Following the three-year low GDP growth of 5.7% in the first quarter, there have been several downgrades to GDP estimates. Soumya Kanti Ghosh, Group Chief Economic Adviser, SBI, said GDP growth in the current fiscal will remain weak. Q2 GDP numbers are likely to be closer to Q1. We, however, see GDP growth picking up pace in Q3 and in Q4 the growth is likely to cross 7%, he added. The report, however, also pointed out that the credit growth decline raises concerns about the economic growth in the country. In financial year 2018, the incremental credit growth (in amount) continues at historical low level at - Rs 1.37 lakh crore. In FY18 so far till August 18, all scheduled commercial banks’ business (deposits and advances) continues to decline. In the current fortnight, there is a negative growth in both deposits and advances. The report said the sectoral deployment of credit for the month of July indicates that a decline in credit growth year on year across all sectors. The worrying thing is that personal loans (especially housing) have expanded measly in the current fiscal, it said. Motilal Oswal Securities said with private consumption slowing and no revival in investments, real GDP growth is bound to fall below 7% in FY18. For full-year FY18, we expect growth to decline to 6.7% from 7.1% in FY17, the report said. Radhika Rao, India Economist, DBS Bank, said the headline GVA and GDP growth estimates disappointed, despite fading impact of demonetisation. Rao said the two key factors that provided support in the June quarter i.e. trade, hotels and transport sector that benefited from an increase in pre-GST sales are expected to moderate going forward.
