New Delhi, September 5: With GDP growth slowing for five straight quarters, a worrisome feature of the growth slowdown is that the sectors with high potential to absorb labour force have seen a sharper dip reducing employment growth, according to ratings agency, Crisil. Most of the sectors that grew fast have low labour intensity and low share in overall output. This suggests that slower economic growth could also have shaved off employment growth in the economy, Crisil said. In the past two quarters, three sectors have grown much faster than GDP, trade, hotels, transport, communication and services related to broadcasting, electricity, gas, water supply and other utilities, and public administration, defence and other services. Crisil said of these, only the trade, hotels and restaurants sub-sector is labour-intensive, requiring about six workers to produce Rs 1 million worth of output. But the share of this sub-sector in total output is low at around 12. In contrast, a fast-growing sector like public administration, defence and other personal services, despite having a larger share in output, has low labour intensity of only three. And sectors with higher labour intensity  such as construction (12) and manufacturing (7)  have been undershooting overall GDP growth. Crisil has trimmed its fiscal 2018 growth forecast for India by 40 basis points to 7% from 7.4% earlier, after data for the first quarter showed GDP growth at 5.7%, the slowest in the past three years. The demonetisation-driven cash crunch hurt economic growth, especially small enterprises, while the imminent rollout of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) spurred destocking and slowdown of production brought down manufacturing growth. The 7% growth forecast implies a GDP growth of 7.4% on average in the remaining three quarters. We believe the sharp decline in growth in the first quarter is transitory and the economy will grind up slowly over the next few quarters as the impact of demonetisation and destocking fades. The Purchasing Manager’s Index (PMI) for August already signals a pick-up in manufacturing activity. The downside risk to our growth outlook is from the GST implementation being more disruptive than what we anticipate Crisil said. The first-quarter GDP numbers released last week brought the growth concerns to the fore. At 5.7% in Q1 fiscal 2018, real GDP growth declined secularly for the fifth straight quarter after peaking at 9.1% in Q4 fiscal 2016. It was also the slowest pace of growth since Q4 fiscal 2013, when growth had slumped to 4.3%. We believe the GST-related disruptions would limit the upside to growth for a few more quarters as there are uncertainties around the possibility of changes to the given tax structure, and as businesses adjust to this new regime, the ratings agency said.
