New Delhi, September 13: Factory output measured in terms of index of industrial production had declined by 0.2% in June, according to revised estimates released on Tuesday During April-July, IIP grew by 1.7%, down from 6.5% in the same period last year Growth of the manufacturing sector, which makes up 77.6% of the index, decelerated sharply to 0.1% in July compared to 5.3% in the same period of 2016 Industrial production grew weaker than expected at 1.2% in July from 4.5% a year ago owing to the weak performance of the manufacturing sector partly on account of the GST transition issues. Factory output measured in terms of index of industrial production had declined by 0.2% in June, according to revised estimates released by the Central Statistics Office (CSO) today. During April-July, IIP grew by 1.7%, down from 6.5% in the same period last year. Growth of the manufacturing sector, which makes up 77.6% of the index, decelerated sharply to 0.1% in July compared to 5.3% in the same period of 2016. Aditi Nayar, Principal Economist, ICRA said the pace of IIP growth was weaker than expected, with the stagnant manufacturing volumes belying the expectation of a boost led by restocking of inventories after the introduction of the GST. She said 15 of the 23 sub-groups of manufacturing recorded a year-on-year contraction in July. Mid-sized, large cars, SUVs set to be dearer Govt notifies GST cess hike New Delhi, September 12 The government has notified levy of increased GST cess of up to 7% on mid-size, large and SUV cars. The GST Council on September 9 had decided to hike cess on mid-size cars by 2%, on large cars by 5% and on SUVs by 7% to bring tax rates on these cars at pre-GST levels.The Finance Ministry late last night notified the hike in quantum of cess to be levied on cars, following which the new rates came into effect.The effective GST rate on mid-size cars will be 45%, and on large cars it would be 48%. The rate will be 50% on sports utility vehicles (SUVs), which include cars with length exceeding 4,000mm and having a ground clearance of 170mm and above.Car prices had dropped by up to Rs 3 lakh as the tax rates fixed under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) that came into effect from July 1, was lower than the combined central and state taxes in the pre-GST days. To fix this anomaly, the council raised the cess.The Finance Ministry now has amended the notification 'Compensation Cess (Rate)', dated the June 28, 2017, and brought in the changes in the rate of cess to be levied.However, cess on small petrol and diesel cars, hybrid cars and those carrying up to 13 passengers has not been raised.Under the GST regime, cars attract the highest tax slab of 28% and on top of that a cess is levied.An ordinance was promulgated last week to hike the cess from 15% to up to 25%. The Council then on September 9 decided on the quantum of hike in cess in various segments. Handicraft business down 40% post GST: Exporters .
Jaipur: The government has ignored the handicraft sector under the GST regime, resulting in a decline of 40% in its business since July 1.The recently held national handicraft exhibition, which was attended by 100 small and big companies, saw its revenue falling by 40% as compared to previous year, said Dileep Baid, president, Federation of Rajasthan Handicraft Exporters (FORHEX).The handicraft business, which employs 70 lakh people in the country, was not considered by financial experts under the GST regime and as a result artisans have to pay GST on marble, granite, wood, and other materials used in their business, Baid said.Due to GST on other materials, the handicraft business community has to pay tax between 12% and 28% as against 5% VAT on items costing more than Rs 1,000, he said. 