New Delhi: The initial share sale offer of ICICI Lombard General Insurance was subscribed 27% on the first day of the three-day bidding on Friday. The IPO, through which the insurer is looking to raise about Rs 5,700 crore, received bids for 1,66,69,466 shares as against the total issue size of 6,16,66,740, according to NSE data. PTIE-commerce player Amazon said on Friday it has tied up with state-run lender Bank of Baroda to offer micro loans to its sellers. The loans will be offered on invite-only basis to the marketplace sellers. PTIIndia’s GDP growth is likely to face near-term headwinds and might slip below 7% mark to a three-year low this financial year, says a DBS report. According to the global financial services major, two recent policy measures  demonetisation and GST rollout had a short-term impact on economic activity and aggravated the already slowing momentum. PTIIndia’s third largest software services firm Wipro said on Friday it has bagged a seven-year contract from European energy company innogy SE. The financial details of the contract, which will see Wipro managing the data centre and cloud services for innogy SE, were not disclosed.
New Delhi, September 16: As much as Rs 65,000 crore out of the nearly Rs 95,000 crore tax collection in July  the first month of GST  has been claimed as transitional credit by taxpayers, prompting the CBEC to order a scrutiny of all cases above Rs 1 crore. The GST regime, which kicked in from July 1, allows tax credit on stock purchased during the previous tax regime. This facility is available only up to six months from the date of GST rollout. The Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC), the body which deals with formulation and implementation of policy concerning the levy and collection of indirect taxes, in a letter dated September 11 has asked tax officials to verify GST transitional credit claims of over Rs 1 crore made by 162 entities. In the transitional credit form TRAN-1 filed by taxpayers along with their maiden returns for July, businesses have claimed a credit of over Rs 65,000 crore for excise, service tax or VAT paid before the GST was implemented from July 1. In light of such huge claims, CBEC Member Mahender Singh in the letter to chief commissioners said as per the GST law, carry forward of transitional credit is permitted only when such credit is permissible under the law. The possibility of claiming ineligible credit due to mistake or confusion cannot be ruled out... It is desired that the claims of ITC (input tax credit) of more than Rs 1 crore may be verified in a time-bound manner, the CBEC emphasised. It asked the chief commissioners to send a report to the CBEC by September 20 on the claims made by these 162 companies. To ensure only eligible credit is carried forward in the GST regime, the CBEC has asked field offices to match the credit claimed with closing balance in returns filed under the earlier law. They are also required to check if the credit is eligible under the GST laws. Till last week, 70% of 59.57 lakh taxpayers had filed returns for July, amounting to revenue of Rs 95,000 crore under the GST regime. 
Bengaluru, September 16: The government on Saturday ruled out any further extension in filing of returns under GST after December and advised the taxpayers to file them in advance and not wait for the last day. We have kept long deadlines for GST filing. For at least six months the taxpayers have to file their own assessment. There will be no extension later, Revenue Secretary Hasmukh Adhia told reporters here after the first meeting of the Group of Ministers (GOM) that was formed to tackle the IT-related glitches.The GST Council has allowed businesses to file GSTR-3B, which is a self-assessment of their sale and purchases, till December. Initial hiccups are there but no mass scale failure. Initial issues need to be sorted out. We have decided a plan of action. The attempt was to work around the difficulties to eliminate problems, leading to better understanding of all stakeholders, he added. Bihar Deputy Chief Minister and BJP leader Sushil Kumar Modi, who heads the GoM, said that it would be only by October 30 that the government would be able to iron out 70-80 per cent of the technical issues being faced in return filing. Taxpayers should not wait for the last day. The general tendency is that people wait for the last day resulting in heavy rush. In the last 3-4 days before the deadline there is heavy rush to file returns. I appeal to all the taxpayers that they should not wait for last day. By October 30, 70-80 per cent of problems we will be able to solve, Modi said. IT services firm Infosys is taking care of the IT infrastructure for GSTN. GOM was formed at the last meeting of GST Council in Hyderabad after lot of I-T issues concering returns filing were raised by the states. Modi said that on Friday, a full day meeting of tax officers of state governments was held with the GST Network (GSTN), stakeholders, bankers, tax experts, big corporates and Infosys regarding the glitches faced in filing returns. The GOM meeting will be held every 15 days, mostly in Bengaluru, with the next meeting scheduled in the first week of October. 