New Delhi: The revenue collection under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) for the month of August came in at Rs 90,669 crore as of September 25, as compared to a higher number of Rs 94,063 crore collected for July. However, the government said a large number of assesses had not filed their return either for July or August. The increase in the revenue figures will be updated in due course. The government data shows that more than 30 lakh taxpayers are yet to file their returns for August. The total number of taxpayers who were required to file monthly returns for August is 68.20 lakh, of which, as on September 25, 37.63 lakh GSTR 3B returns have been filed. The last date for payment of GST as well as filing of GSTR 3B return for the month of August 2017 was September 20.
New Delhi, September 27: The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has slashed India’s GDP growth forecast for the current fiscal to 7% from 7.4% owing to weakness in private consumption, manufacturing output and business investment. The 7% GDP growth expected in 2017-18 is lower than 7.1% recorded in 2016-17 and its earlier projection of 7.4% in July. ADB pencilled in 7.4% for 2018-19, down from the earlier forecast of 7.6% in July. It was, however, bullish on growth gaining traction on reforms. Private consumption is expected to pick up on the back of low inflation and anticipated wage hikes. Manufacturing is also likely to bounce back as the sector adjusts to the new tax regime, the multilateral lending agency said in an update on its Asian Development Outlook (ADO) 2017. India’s growth fell to a 3-year low of 5.7% in the April-June quarter of 2017-18 due to lingering effects from demonetisation and transitory challenges related to the new goods and services tax (GST) regime, it said. Weakness in private consumption, manufacturing output, and business investment has resulted in lowering the short-term growth outlook for the country, it added. On the June quarter dip in expansion, it said growth in private consumption and industry declined compared to previous quarters. Fixed capital formation grew by a sluggish 1.6%, indicating a sharp slowdown in private investment. Government consumption and services, however, continued to buoy economic activity. India’s ambitious reforms agenda will lead to higher long-run growth for its economy, said Yasuyuki Sawada, ADB Chief Economist. Despite the short-term hiccups as firms adapt to the national GST, we believe that continued reform progress will help India remain one of the world’s most dynamic emerging economies.
Slashes GDP growth estimate from 7.4% to 6.7% in FY18
New Delhi, September 27:  The combined effect of demonetisation and introduction of Goods and Services Tax (GST) is proving to be more disruptive for the economy than was expected earlier, according to India Ratings which has cut its earlier GDP growth estimate of 7.4% to 6.7% during financial year 2018. On the after-effects of demonetisation on the economy, India Ratings said sucking out the high-denomination currency while failing to remonetise the economy quickly has in many cases proved fatal for the unorganised sector and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) where business transactions are heavily cash dependent. As these enterprises have still not been able to recover fully, their pain is finding a reflection in overall economic growth. Although the rollout of GST was fairly smooth and the first month revenue collection was encouraging, some stress points have emerged. The destocking by manufacturers and the loss of liquidity for exporters due to delayed GST refunds has affected business activities in the economy, the agency said. Poor gross domestic product (GDP) growth in two successive quarters quarter 4 of FY17 and quarter 1 of FY18  has changed the growth prospects for FY18, says India Ratings and Research. The combined effect of demonetisation and introduction of goods and services tax (GST) is proving to be more disruptive for the economy than was expected earlier. While the introduction of GST cannot be faulted on account of its eventual benefit to the economy, the same cannot be said about the impact of demonetisation. India Ratings said GDP growth will recover quarter-on-quarter in quarter 2 of FY18 with impact of demonetisation waning, teething problem arising out of GST implementation being looked into by the government and the festival season round the corner. However, it is unlikely to meet the agency’s earlier projection of 7.4% and will come down to 6.7% during FY18.
