New Delhi, October 16: Retail markets are wearing a gloomy look just before Diwali with traders claiming that lower footfalls have resulted in a 40% drop in sales in comparison to last year. Traders body CAIT said with just three days to go for Diwali, markets across the country are gloomy and wear a deserted look. The lack of festivity and less footfalls of the consumers has resulted in a 40% drop in sales as compared to last year. The CAIT said acute cash shortage is the main reason for the slowdown and lower footfalls of the consumers in the markets. Consumers are more inclined to buy only essential commodities and skipping discretionary items because of cash shortage in their pockets. While investments stuck in real estate and gold have not yielded good returns leading to money being blocked and the slowdown is further multiplied by glitches in GST turning to be a situation of chaos in the markets all over the country, the CAIT said. Traders have also alleged that e-commerce portals were indulging in unfair business practices by offering unrealistic discounts, restraining consumers to go to markets. According to a report by Motilal Oswal Securities on consumer sentiment in central India, markets in central India are cash-dependent and with curbs on cash post-demonetisation, volume growth had suffered. The report said with the waning of the demonetisation blues now, there has been heavy disruption in the wholesale channel post-GST rollout. Staples demand has suffered, but travel and luxury goods sales have been affected even more, it added.
THE TRIBUNE CORPORATE BROADBAND SCOPE in collaboration with National Academy of Customs, Excise and Narcotics (NACIN), organised a capsule course on GST at SCOPE Convention Centre, New Delhi on October 14. Ved Prakash, Chairman, SCOPE and CMD, MMTC, Archana P Tiwari, Director General, NACIN, Yogendra Garg, Additional Director General, Centre for Excellence & GST, addressed the inaugural session which was attended by a large number of senior executives of public sector enterprises. In his welcome address, Dr UD Choubey, Director General, SCOPE, said the introduction of GST has been a landmark initiative and a game changer in the economic history of India. He said it will consolidate the sovereign holding of the capital and strengthen our federal structure. It will provide long-term economic development and regional balanced growth, he added.Market regulator SEBI has initiated an investor awareness campaign to alert people about the dangers of following unsolicited tips from unverifiable, unknown or dubious sources while taking decisions involving their hard-earned money. The communication is being done in the public interest. The campaign focuses on educating individuals through guidance and awareness messages aimed at the novice investor who might be taken for a ride by unscrupulous manipulators.In line with nationwide campaign to boost the country's flagship scheme, J&K State Level Bankers' Committee (SLBC) has launched 'Mudra Yojana Campaign' at Convention Centre, Canal Road, Jammu. The aim of the campaign is to promote the Pradhan Mantri Mudra Loan scheme to fund small businesses without hassles. Vagish Chander, Executive President, J&K Bank, said: "Reaching out to the people on a massive scale through Mudra Yojna Campaign, the Government of India also seeks to promote financial inclusion schemes and digital payment methods to encourage consumers and merchants to increasingly shift to these modes of payment. Prime Minister's Mudra Yojna (PMMY) is the flagship scheme of Government of India which aims to provide formal access of financial facilities to the small businesses thereby creating more self-employment opportunities."Union Bank of India has entered into agreement with the Delhi Municipal Corporation, North (DMC-North) for digital salary disbursement to all employees through Union Bank's Centralised Salary Management System. The salary for approximately 57,000 employees will be processed and disbursed in a single day without any manual intervention. The system will facilitate seamless transfer of funds electronically with complete MIS facility. It will help DMC-North in better management, tracking of funds, interpretation and decision making with effective monitoring tool in the form of MIS and in turn it will help DMC-North to save a lot of manpower and time. Launches Union Sahyog app Driving the rollercoaster wave of India's digital transformation, Union Bank of India has launched trailblazing innovation with the launch of its app Union Sahyog, which will bring entire customer facing banking on the mobile. The Union Sahyog App facilitates easy viewing of the bank's extensive product offerings in both English and Hindi language; seeking to serve hands-on convenience to customers on their mobile devices.CT University has signed an MoU with University of Derby with the objective of student exchange, faculty exchange and research collaborations in the areas of mutual interests, for production of academic publications, journals and papers and organising international events. Dr Kathryn Mitchell, Vice-Chancellor and Chief Executive, University of Derby, and Lew Wernick, Head of International Recruitment and Collaborations, visited CT University.LG Electronics has unveiled its new range of OLED TVs. The OLED TV boasts of Dolby VisionTM, Dolby Atmos®, color Science Expertise by Technicolor and delivers an unparalleled viewing experience. With this launch, LG is all set to redefine the TV viewing experience for the Indian consumers through its superlative technology accompanied with pioneering aesthetics.Audi has announced the introduction of the #A5BratPack in India by launching the Audi A5 Sportback. The powerful and flowing silhouette makes the trio truly aesthetic with abundant space inside. Beneath their skin, notably impressive traits include a newly developed suspension, high-performance drives, innovative infotainment solutions, the Audi Virtual Cockpit and the Audi Smartphone Interface. The Audi A5 Sportback, the Audi A5 Cabriolet and the new Audi S5 Sportback are priced at Rs 54,02,000, Rs 67,51,000 and Rs 70,60,000, respectively.New Holland Agriculture has inaugurated its 'Technology Centre' at Nabha. Top officials from Punjab Agricultural University (PAU), Ludhiana, and New Holland Agriculture India along with progressive farmers from Punjab and Haryana were present at the inauguration ceremony. Standing tall in the city famous for manufacturing combine harvesters, New Holland 'Technology Centre' has a vast range of technologically superior farm mechanization solutions on display. Spread across an area of more than 5,000 sq ft, the centre is equipped with a training facility, visitor lounge and educational videos for customers and visitors.Alchemist Hospital, Panchkula, has launched a dedicated super cardiac surgery OPD at Karnal to provide specialised care to patients of the region which lacks tertiary healthcare facilities. Dr Rajan Mehra, Head - Cardiac Surgery, Alchemist, said the OPD will be held at Rama Super Speciality & Critical Care Hospital, Karnal, on every second Thursday of the month from 11.30 am to 1 pm.
