Lucknow, October 19: Reeling under disruptions arising out of demonetisation and GST rollout, corporate India is going rather lukewarm in Diwali gifts, slashing the budget under the head by at least 35-40%, Assocham said. A survey by industry chamber Assocham showed that the reduction in gifts from corporate houses was in sync with low-key festivities due to slowdown concerns and pressure on their balance sheets. The industry body said the reduction in gifts from corporate houses to their associates, networked partners, employees and other key personalities was more for outside connects than employees who more or less received their annual gesture from their employers. However, there has been certainly a downward impact on bonus payments with several corporates reeling under debt and cutting costs in their overall operations. Besides, disruptions arising out of demonetisation and rollout issues of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) have affected the overall sentiment, it said. Consequent to slowdown in the Diwali gift sale, the FMCG companies which generally bet high on festive sales in the business of chocolates, cookies and sweets are reporting less than normal sales, Assocham secretary general DS Rawat said. Entrepreneurs fear manufacturers could shift to big players
Chandigarh, October 19:  The Central government recently allowed small traders and businessmen having turnover of up to Rs 1.5 crore to file GST return quarterly instead of monthly in order to bring simplicity and reduce compliance cost for small taxpayers. Industrialists feel while this move would ease the compliance for the SMEs, they apprehend it may affect adversely and they could suffer business losses. Industrialists and tax consultants say the repercussions of this move will be felt later (in about six months) and if corrective steps are not taken, it can prove death knell for small industries having a turnover of up to Rs 1.5 crore. The small taxpayers with turnover up to Rs 1.5 crore constitute 90% of taxpayers’ base but pay only 5-6% of the total tax. A majority of manufacturers in small, medium and large category procures finished goods from small manufacturers having turnover of less than Rs 1.5 crore and later they (buyers) claim input tax credit in their monthly return. Since these small players will file quarterly returns now, the accounts of buyers will be settled after three months only and if there is any discrepancy, it will lead to further delay. So, small, medium and large manufacturers will gradually shift to bigger manufacturers, said Ashwani Kohli, senior vice-president, Punjab Chamber of Small Exporters. The industry feels that if large manufacturers buy components from industries having turnover greater than Rs 1.5 crore, they will get input tax credit refund in one and a half months as accounts are settled as soon as they file their returns. Echoing similar sentiments, Mastan Singh Chambyal, a chartered accountant, said, Though buyers can claim input tax credit from suppliers having turnover of up to Rs 1.5 crore on a provisional basis after filing their monthly returns, their accounts will be settled only after the suppliers file their quarterly returns. Further, if any discrepancy arises, the buyers will have to wait for few months. So the buyers will shift to suppliers in the organised sector having turnover of over Rs 1.5 crore and file monthly return.
