Chandigarh, October 24: Perturbed over rising imports of man-made fibre textiles from China due to lower import duty, Ludhiana-based knitters will meet Punjab Finance Minister Manpreet Singh Badal tomorrow so that the matter could be taken up in next GST Council meeting. The manufacturers want higher import duty on man-made fibre textiles so that the domestic industry doesn’t suffer. Ludhiana is a hub of knitwear industry in Punjab, having around 5,000 units with a majority of them in the MSME sector. After the implementation of GST, the import duty on man-made fibres has fallen from a cumulative 28.5% (including basic custom duty, countervailing duty, special additional duty, education cess) to about 15.3% (including basic custom duty, education cess and Integrated Goods and Service Tax). Thus, the import has become cheaper by about 13.2%. In addition to this, China, which is the major exporter to India (having 90% market share) provides drawback/incentive of 18% on man-made textile exports. As a result, major fabric import is being done from China, affecting the domestic industry. We have suggested imposing dumping duty on import of man-made fibres as a step to protect the domestic industry, said Ajit Lakra, president, Ludhiana knitters Association. Most man-made fibre yarns and their raw materials attract anti-dumping duties. He said there was a serious gap in import tariff structure wherein there is specific duty on most types of fabrics. But there is no such specific duty on chapter 60 which comprises knitted fabrics. Lakra said these changes need to be done with immediate effect otherwise the industry will be in doldrums.
New Delhi, October 24 The government on Tuesday waived penalty on delayed filing of initial GST returns for the months of August and September. "To facilitate taxpayers, late fee on filing of GSTR-3B for August and September has been has been waived," Finance Minister Arun Jaitley tweeted. He said that the late fee which has been already charged to businesses will be credited back to taxpayers' accounts. The government had earlier waived late fee for delayed filing of the maiden returns for the month of July under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime. Businesses have been demanding that the government waives penalty for delayed filing of 3B returns. As per the data, 55.87 lakh GSTR-3B returns were filed for July, 51.37 lakh for August and over 42 lakh for September. Preliminary returns GSTR-3B for a month is filed on the 20th day of the next month after paying due taxes. As per the data with the GST Network (GSTN), a huge chunk of businesses file their returns after the expiry of the due date. While only 33.98 lakh July returns were filed till the due date, the number has now gone up to 55.87 lakh. Similarly for August 28.46 lakh returns were filed till the last date, but the figure went up to 51.37 lakh later. Also, for September, while 39.4 lakh returns were filed by the due date, the number is rising and was over 42 lakh till yesterday. The GST law provides for a nominal fee of Rs 100 per day on Central GST and an equivalent amount on State GST in case of late filing of returns and payment of taxes. PTI
