New Delhi, October 26: The restaurant industry has opposed the reported move to reduce GST on air-conditioned restaurants from 18 per cent to 12 per cent without an input tax credit as it claims that the move would, on the contrary, increase food prices for customers. The National Restaurant Association of India (NRAI) said this is because under the current 18 per cent rate, restaurants get to claim credits on the taxes they pay on various things such as processed food, rent, electricity and transportation. However, if the GST rate is brought down to 12 per cent, they will not able to claim rebates in the absence of an input tax credit, resulting in an increase in their operational costs by 7-10 per cent. In fact, even in the earlier tax regime, restaurants were allowed an input tax credit on certain items, the NRAI said. Under the earlier tax regime, the tax on processed food was at 5 per cent, but now under GST, this has gone up to 12 per cent. Taxes on many such inputs have gone up, so if we do not get an input tax credit, our cost of running will go up, leading to higher menu prices for customers, Riyaaz Amlani, NRAI chief said. The GST Council had taken up the issue of whether the restaurants are passing on the input tax credit as lower costs to consumers and had decided to evaluate the matter. Among the proposals is to reduce the GST rate to 12 per cent without an input tax credit.
Tokyo, October 26: Japanese auto major Honda Motor Co on Thursday said it would launch six new models in India in the next three years to enhance its position in the market there. The company, however, said there would not be any hybrid or electric vehicle models in the upcoming line-up, as it awaits clarity on government policy regarding electric mobility.We have six big launches coming up in the next three years in India...It will not include any battery vehicles, Honda Motor Co CEO Takahiro Hachigo told a group of visiting Indian journalists here. All these new models will be assembled at the company’s two plants in India. But he did not divulge details of segments where these models would be present. When asked about the absence of hybrids from the line up, he said, When it comes to India we still don’t know if hybrids segment will grow or how the electric vehicles will grow. We need to study government policy to understand more. The advantages of hybrids, however, is that they can use existing infrastructure, Hachigo added. After the implementation of GST in July this year, hybrids vehicles have become expensive in India as the tax incidence increased as compared to previous taxation regime. Hachigo said Honda’s endeavour would be to make hybrids affordable for customers rather than worrying about government support.
