The phone starts ringing at 8 am, a good one hour before Mahesh Kumar Agarwal reaches his office in Delhi’s Netaji Subhash Place. “Clients start calling if they get stuck and need guidance on GST-related matters,” says the 58-year-old chartered accountant. When his other mobile phone and landline also join the chorus, Mahesh turns to his children for assistance. And for good reason. All three of them — Minal, Komal and Aditya — are chartered accountants and well versed in the rules of the new tax.The eldest daughter Minal, 30, conducts GST impact analysis for foreign and large Indian corporations. She also advises them on GST rules and the changes required in their operations. Employees of a north India-based footwear manufacturer have always looked forward to July 1 when their company gave them discount coupons.This year, Minal advised the company to defer the practice because supply without consideration would attract GST. “Those who get lavish Diwali gifts will have to be content with cheaper stuff this year. If the value of the gift exceeds Rs 50,000, it will attract GST,” she says. Her brother Aditya, a freshly minted CA who passed the exam in 2016, conducts training workshops for SMEs. Last week, he was in Amritsar on the invitation of an association of cloth merchants. “Textile traders and manufacturers, who were exempt from tax till now, are completely clueless about GST,” he says.When it comes to GST preparedness, foreign corporations are far ahead of domestic companies. During an overseas trip, Minal was surprised by the sharp and cogent queries raised by the finance honchos of MNCs operating in India. Meanwhile, in India even those who are supposed to know all this are not clear about the basic tenets of the new law. “Many CAs don’t understand that though GST is a destination-based tax , the registration needs to be done only in the state of origin of the product or service,” says Minal.This severe lack of awareness about the new tax means GST-savvy chartered accountants like the Agarwals are in great demand. “My WhatsApp inbox is flooded with queries,” says Aditya. “It feels nice to be in the right place, at the right time.” At the same time, he understands that not all finance professionals will be able to tap into this opportunity. “GST is a new law and subsumes 17 other laws. Only chartered accountants who have developed expertise in this area will be in high demand,” says Aditya.The Agarwals also realise the need to update themselves on the law that is still undergoing changes. “The rules are still evolving and every day there is a new change in the law,” says Minal. It’s particularly challenging for older professionals such as Mahesh who have to forget the tax rules they learnt over the past 30-40 years. “We have to learn, relearn and unlearn a lot. If we don’t keep ourselves updated, the advice to the client will not be accurate or useful,” says Mahesh.Mahesh is delighted that his children have followed his profession, but insists he never forced them to. “Nowadays, nobody can force someone to choose a certain vocation. My children were interested in the profession and made their own choices,” he says. He may have been the inspiration, though. A 2016 research by Facebook shows that children are more likely to follow the professions of their parents and siblings. The study analysed data of 5.6 million people who had mentioned their professions in their profiles.If 80% of the five-member family are chartered accountants, it is hardly surprising that conversations at the dinner table are usually about double entries, debit/credit and balance sheet reconciliation. There are times when Mahesh’s homemaker wife Sunita feels out of place, especially when casual discussions between the four chartered accountants meander into professional territory.“She has got used to it but sometimes feels completely alone at the dinner table,” says Komal, the younger daughter, who completed CA in 2014. “My mother says, ‘You guys are making money but I am the one who is paying a price for it’,” Komal adds with a chuckle.
MUMBAI: With the advent of GST and RERA , developers would now have to adopt higher standards of performance compelling them to invest in project management, say experts.The government enacted the Real Estate (Regulation & Development) Act 2016 and all the sections of the Act have come into force with effect from May 1, this year, while the Goods and Services Tax came into effect from July 1.The GST and the RERA are touted as game changers converting unorganised real estate into an organised sector."While the advent of RERA is being heralded as a game-changer and a great enabler in the long run, it may cause inconvenience in the short term. This is where project management will help the stakeholders," CBRE South Asia Managing Director, Project Management Group Gurjot Bhatia told PTI here.A project manager's role is to ensure that the project stays on course based on the initially planned budget, schedule and vision, said SILA Founder and Managing Director Sahil Vora."Post RERA, the roles played by a project manager have become mandatory on the developer, as he needs to deliver what was initially planned."GST ensures that developers only use organised vendors and suppliers, in order to get the input tax credit, which will also improve the efficiency in delivering projects," he said.According to statistics by Project Management Institute, organisations that drive optimal project management practices meet their goals two-and-half times more often than those in low performing organisations.Ozone Group's Chief Executive Srinivasan Gopalan opined that compliance with RERA and GST would add an additional requirement on developers as per law."Developers will need to work in tandem with all stakeholders like contractors, vendors, brokers, marketing agencies, to ensure that the developer is in compliance with law at all points of time. This is where the project management plays a vital role as it puts processes, procedures and the various parties involved in sync," he said.Echoing similar view, Puraniks Builders Managing Director Shailesh Puranik said for developers to sustain in the competitive environment it is essential for them to ensure that all their projects are managed effectively."RERA necessitated creation of separate account under which developers will be required to make a deposit of 70 per cent of the collected amount in an escrow account to ensure that this money is not diverted from one project to another."In lieu of this, the developer has to strengthen delivery and project management capabilities to stay within budget limitations and encourage timely deliveries, apart from avoiding heavy penalties," he added.
NEW DELHI: Tax consultancy firm EY has launched a GST helpdesk for small businesses wherein they can post their queries on the new indirect tax regime online.EY GST Helpdesk is driven by a pool of indirect tax professionals powered by over 800 GST practitioners across 14 cities.The facility would be available for free to small businesses, traders and entrepreneurs to achieve a seamless transition to GST and queries can be posted on EY India Tax Insights App, DigiGST website and EY_India on Twitter."This facility will help in enabling a smooth transition for smaller businesses and traders across the country," EY India Chairman Rajiv Memani said.Businesses are in the midst of ensuring GST compliance and they have to align their software systems as per the GST requirement as well as adapt themselves to the new return filing and invoice generating format."We believe this helpdesk will be of great help to small entrepreneurs and help them realise the benefits of GST," EY India National Tax Leader Sudhir Kapadia said.Goods and Services Tax (GST), rolled out from July 1, unifies 17 different taxes like excise, service tax and VAT and will transform India into a single market for seamless transfer of goods and services.
NEW DELHI: The government has exempted the import of aircraft aircraft engines and its parts procured on lease from the purview of the Goods and Services Tax ( GST ).The aviation industry had been asking for relief as it was facing a dual levy of 5 per cent at the time of import and another 5 per cent at the time of payment of lease rent Its concerns were raised by the civil aviation ministry before the revenue department on several occasions.The finance ministry in a notification yesterday said that airlines would not have to pay GST on import of aircraft and its parts if GST was paid on their lease.Airlines are awaiting a formal clarification on several other areas of concerns such as input tax credit not being available for economy class tickets and the movement of spares from one part of the country to another.
