MUMBAI: While last November’s demonetisation choked the cash-based unorganised retail trade in the country, the game-changing Goods and Services Tax ( GST ) is rewiring the retail eco system in other ways. Walmart and Metro Cash and Carry stores have seen mom-and-pop store memberships surge as they shift away from unorganised wholesalers yet to be GST compliant.A greater number of small grocers are rushing in to buy daily essentials from the bigbox format, a trend that companies expect to continue in the long term.“There would be some level of channel reset in which we believe that organised wholesale will become stronger,” Sanjiv Mehta, managing director at Hindustan Unilever said in an investors call last week. “And just speaking to Walmart the other day, the numbers of customers they have enrolled in the last couple of weeks have been much higher than what they have done in the past, which is a very clear indicator that organised wholesale will go up.”Nearly 2.6% of traditional trade in all consumer product goods (CPG) moves through organised wholesale and has been growing faster than modern trade, albeit on a lower base. Cash and carry operators sell merchandise to local kirana stores, hotels and catering firms.“There will be a process of education, although we didn’t expect memberships and sales to surge so quickly. GST will definitely benefit us in the long term as smaller customers get habituated to buying from organised channel,” said Krish Iyer, CEO at Walmart India.India moved towards a unified tax structure that replaced multiple state and central levies from July 1. While the rollout has largely been smooth, consumer goods makers, retailers and trade channels have experienced some disruptions, especially in June. Most companies and distributors tried to empty their stocks by June 30 because of uncertainty over transition norms and new prices.While both Walmart and Metro saw sales dip in the first week of July, it recovered sharply due to increase in memberships.“Increased customers, especially from smaller businesses, resulted in higher sales but smaller basket size on an average. We have set up GST kiosks at our stores to help traders file returns,” said Arvind Mediratta, managing director, Metro Cash and Carry India. “We also expect several unorganised traders shutting shop due to non-compliance.”
NEW DELHI: The distance travelled by trucks per day has increased by at least 30% post the rollout of goods and services tax (GST), according to a document prepared by the road transport ministry on the impact of GST on logistics sector.Trucks are covering 300-325 km a day on an average against about 225 km a day before GST, it said.The booklet, which is being shared with MPs and also in the social media, mentions that the end of border checkposts across states, reduction in congestion on highways and logistics firms avoiding wasteful expenditure on tax compliance and deposit of inter-state sales tax would reduce the logistics cost by 10-12%.At present, the logistics cost is about 14% of the total value of goods as against 6-8% in developed countries. The ministry, in its booklet, mentions that typically a truck spends 20% of its run time at inter-state checkposts and covers about 60,000 km annually as against two lakh km in the West. Citing the example of Chennai-Kolkata route, the report says earlier about 30% of the total travel time was spent at border checkposts and due to congestion.Quoting an analysis of freight movement in top 15 states before July 1 (pre-GST period), the booklet says while in states such as Rajasthan and Maharashtra where only 20-30 minutes were spent at any border on an average, there were states such as Bihar and Jharkhand where commercial vehicles would end up spending over two hours at each border.
CHENNAI: Would it bother you if halwa were designated ‘jelly’, and dhokla ‘cake’? It is worrying mithai makers, though, as the goods and services tax GST ) has made taxation of sweets and savouries a minefield.For example, plain barfi, which is a ‘sweet’, is taxed at the lowest rate of 5%, but chocolate barfi with a chocolate-flavoured layer on top risks being bundled with chocolates and taxed at 28%. Even plain barfi garnished with cardamom and dry fruit could be taxed along with nuts at 12%.More complex dishes like falooda — a combination of ice cream, fruit, jelly, vermicelli pudding, jam, chocolate shavings, etc — and fruit jelly custard trifle are easy targets for the highest tax rate of 28%. Even the diabetic-friendly versions of sweets, gums, etc that contain synthetic sweetening agents like sorbitol come under 18% GST.Amid confusion over GST rates , mithai makers are playing safe by cutting back on variety. “We are making only plain sandesh, plain badusha, plain barfi and plain peda,” said Mahesh Rajasekhar from sweet chain KC Das that has stopped making mango and chocolate sandesh.“We are trying to figure out if we need to pay 28% tax on it as many of our chocolate variations have more than 5% cocoa content. Badam milk, basundi and rasmalai are also a concern as we aren’t sure if they are sweets (5% tax) or beverages (12% tax). GST is going to hamper our creativity.”A sweet like chikki made from equal parts groundnut and jaggery certainly leaves a lot of room for interpretation, said Suresh Nair, partner, indirect tax , Ernst & Young, adding, “Chapter 2008 says nuts such as groundnut and cashew, whether roasted, sweetened, salted or otherwise, are taxable at 18%.”That sounds like an opportunity to KT Srinivasa Raja, founder, Adyar Anand Bhavan (A2B) and member of Chennai Hotels Association (CHA). “If it is plain roasted cashew, we would have to tax it at 18%. Instead, we would add some more ingredients like aloo bhujia, namkeen, mixture, etc, to make it a snack that can be taxed at 12%. Even better, make it a sweet for taxation at 5%.”Sellers are getting creative for lower tax rates. As fruit jellies, mousse, pastries and pies come under the 18% GST slab, some are considering renaming and re-packaging them as sweets to pay 5% tax. Shopkeepers said western desserts like macaroons, custards, tarts, cakes and pastries could even be Indianised to avoid the high tax rate of 18%.
Never miss a great news story!

Get instant notifications from Economic Times

AllowNot now

You can switch off notifications anytime using browser settings.
MUMBAI: More than a fourth of India’s 6 million-strong truck pool is said to be idle after the goods and services tax ( GST ) came into force on July 1 amid a drop in interstate movement of untaxed and underreported cargo, leading to a fall in retail freight charges. That’s having a knock-on effect on the transport and truck-making businesses, at least in the short term, experts said.Interstate retail freight rates are down 40-50%, the sharpest decline in over three decades, said SP Singh, senior fellow at the Indian Foundation of Transport Research and Training ( IFTRT ). Such steep declines in freight rates were seen in 1984, 1988, 2008 and just after the 2016 demonetisation , say transporters . To be sure, transport operators are reporting logistic efficiency gains as those trucks that are running are reaching destinations quicker with border check posts having been scrapped.India’s 6 million trucks range from 5 tonnes to 49 tonnes. Out of the total, 1.3 million have national permits and 1.2 million have permits for their home state and neighbouring states, with 40-45% of them not running currently. Out of the remaining 3.5 million trucks that have permits for their home states, a fourth are idle, added Singh However, in the long run, the increased economic activity that’s expected to result from GST, will mean greater demand for trucks, raising the prospect of a big boost for the commercial vehicle market.But for now, wholesale and distribution businesses in particular are hesitant to despatch untaxed cargo under the GST regime. Untaxed invoices dodging the tax authorities have virtually disappeared from freight markets, except for a few interstate destinations in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, parts of Maharashtra and the North-East, said Singh of IFTRT. That’s led to a postponement of new truck purchases and a rise in defaults on hire purchase dues.Non-banking finance companies may hold back on lending, pushing up interest rates. The Indian medium and heavy truck segment fell 32% in the June quarter to 48,493 units due to significant pre-buying in the preceding quarter and delayed purchases due to uncertainty on GST. Long-haul transporters renew their fleet every five-six years, with the older trucks going to the secondary market. But transporters have stopped selling older vehicles, as there is no clarity over GST on secondhand trucks, said Naveen Gupta, secretary general, All India Motor Transport Congress (AIMTC). He’s sought government support for truckers who can’t make loan and insurance payments on account of lower earnings.The worst hit are small fleet operators and small and medium enterprises (SMEs), which account for almost 40% of the load carried in the country, according to a senior executive at a leading truck maker. Many operated outside the purview of taxes and it will take a few months before the numbers get back to former levels as they become familiar with the GST regime. However, Jasjit Sethi, CEO of TCI Supply Chain Solutions, one of India’s largest transporters, said July has always been a slow month.He expects a hockey stick kind of growth in the next quarter as transporters get more comfortable with GST. “The idle capacity in our opinion is at about 10-15%, which is largely seasonal in nature with a little bit of impact from the GST announcement,” Sethi said. “The movement is sluggish right now, but with the onset of festive season, we are expecting stronger movement of goods and the freight rates to firm up.”Another truck company executive said his company had started seeing a 10-15% increased efficiency in goods movement, which effectively means the existing fleet can do that much more business. Vinod Aggarwal, MD and CEO at VE Commercial Vehicles , expects demand to be slow in the coming two months before things normalise in the GST ecosystem. “There are hiccups expected in the next one or two months,” he said. “Starting September, the demand may pick up. Customers are in wait-and-watch mode. One after the other disruptions have taken place. Government has to look at ways of boosting private investment and that combined with correction of interest rates will help drive demand fundamentally.”When buying resumes, transporters will seek quality. “With faster turnaround time and higher efficiencies, people will be more inclined to replace the older legacy trucks with modern trucks, which is expected to gain a larger pie of the market and that in turn will aid growth in commercial vehicle market," said TCI’s Sethi.
