India climbed 30 positions in the latest ease of doing business ranking by the World Bank, in its Doing Business 2018 report released on Tuesday. The report ranks India at 100 among 190 countries. Last year, India was ranked 130.Also Read India to leapfrog 30 places in business ease rank.Improving India’s ranking in the report has been a key component of PM Narendra Modi’s economic agenda.“..Indian government has been focussed on reforms and since the Modi government came into office, it began looking at this area, trying to understand what we measure, how we measure, what is the value of it and designed a reform programme that addresses some of the shortcomings that were measured by the indicators and this is the result of that..these things take some time to come into fruition,” Ms. Ramalho said. “India made big efforts in the last three years and what is seen in this report is not last year’s reforms only,” she said, adding that the methodology of the study captures the actual implementation of a particular reform once it is enacted, resulting in a time lag before it is reflected in the report.India’s upward jump in ranking is based on the underlying improvement in the distance to frontier (DTF) score — an absolute measure of progress towards the best practice - in the report. India recorded the fifth highest change in DTF score and found a place for the first time in the top ten economies improving the most in a given year, in the report which is into its 15th edition. The ease of doing business ranking compares economies with one another; the DTF score benchmarks economies with respect to regulatory best practice. Ms. Ramalho described India’s progress on both counts “high and rare.”Doing Business report measures aspects of regulation affecting 11 areas of the life of a business, and India made eight reforms across these areas last year, the highest number for the country in a single year. India is one of the three countries last year that undertook reforms in as many as eight areas.Faster permits for construction, combining the application for the Permanent Account Number (PAN) and the Tax Account Number (TAN) into a single submission, reduction in the time needed to complete the applications for Employee’s Provident Fund Organization (EPFO) and the Employee’s State Insurance Corporation (ESIC), reduction in export and import border compliance costs and improved access to credit are among the reforms noted by the report. “…the establishment of debt recovery tribunals reduced non-performing loans by 28% and lowered interest rates on larger loans, suggesting that faster processing of debt recovery cases cut the cost of credit,” the report said.India is now in the middle of the list, moving up from the last quarter but still it is at a place where there is scope for improvement, the WB official said. “There are still significant changes possible, though the change this year is significant, both in relative and absolute terms,” she said.India used to be the last among the BRICS - Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa - countries in the ranking, but now it has overtaken Brazil in the list. China maintained the same ranking it had last year, at 78. New Zealand, Singapore and Denmark retained their first, second and third spots. Russia, at 35 is the best among BRICS countries; while Brazil is now the last.Bank officials said enforcement of contract is one area of concern in India. The time to enforce a contract has only become longer today, at 1445 days compared to 1420 days 15 years ago, placing India at 164th place in the ranking on Enforcing Contracts indicator. Property registration and property transition, land registry and administration remain complicated in India compared to many other countries. India has reduced the time to register a new business to 30 days now, from 127 days 15 years ago. Still, local entrepreneurs in Mumbai need to go through 12 procedures to start a business in Mumbai which is considerably more than in OECD countries where it takes five procedures on average. “This is a marathon and not a sprint; patience is a virtue here. What you see here is the result of years of work,” said Santiago Croci Acting Manager of Doing Business Unit at the WB.
Manufacturing activity in October was more subdued than the level seen in the previous month due to a slowdown in new orders caused by the implementation of the Goods and Services Tax, according to a private sector survey.The Nikkei India Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index reading for October came in at 50.3, declining from 51.2 in September.A reading above 50 indicates an expansion while one below 50 denotes a contraction in activity. “Growth in India’s manufacturing sector lost momentum in October,” the report said. “Output rose only fractionally and new orders stagnated over the month. In response to subdued demand conditions, both purchasing activity and pre-production inventories decreased.”“The downward movement in the headline index was partly driven by a stagnation in new business,” the report added. “Panellists linked subdued demand conditions to negative impacts of GST.”The report also noted that output growth slowed to the lowest in the current three-month period of rising production, saying that firms that witnessed an increase in output pegged this to stronger demand, while those that saw a decrease in output blamed the negative effects of GST.“India’s manufacturing companies struggled somewhat as the recent recovery enjoyed by the sector lost impetus in October,” Aashna Dodhia, economist, IHS Markit, and the report’s author, wrote. “Inflows of new orders stagnated as the negative effects arising from the implementation of GST continued to dampen demand... Further, overseas demand for Indian goods dipped to the greatest extent since September 2013.”She also highlighted a positive aspect, saying that the labour market continued to improve, with manufacturers further increasing staffing, and October’s activity similar to the pace seen in September’s 59-month high.
The month of October was a mixed bag for India’s auto majors with firms like market leader Maruti Suzuki and Toyota reporting higher growth in passenger vehicle (PV) sales while others such as Mahindra & Mahindra (M&M) and Ford posted a decline as demand tapered off after Diwali.Maruti Suzuki India sold more than 1.35 lakh PVs in the domestic market last month, an increase of 9.3% from the more than 1.23 lakh units sold in October 2016.Toyota Kirloskar Motor (TKM) said it sold 12,403 vehicles in the domestic market in October 2017, a growth of 6.4% year-on-year as the festive season “ushered in positive spirit in the market despite price rise in line with cess hike.” N. Raja, director and senior vice president (sales & marketing) at TKM added, “There is a spurt in the customer demand.”While M&M reported a marginal growth in its total domestic sales, the sales of PVs declined by 5% to 23,413 units while those of commercial vehicles rose 7% to 19,279 units. “The auto industry has had a mixed month. The build up to Dhanteras and Diwali was good but the demand tapered off subsequently,” said Rajan Wadhera, president, automotive sector, M&M. He said last year all festivals were in October and the industry volumes had a high base. For Tata Motors, domestic passenger and commercial vehicles sales grew at 5% to 48,886 units on the back of “festive demand, increased positive customer sentiment and introduction of new products. PV sales rose 1% to 16,475 units.“We will maintain cautious optimism in the market and hope to see this momentum continue,” said Mayank Pareek, president, passenger vehicles business unit, Tata Motors.Ford India reported 43.82% decline in sales at 4,218 units. The company said ramp-up for new model introduction had impacted its wholesale for October.Hyundai Motor India sold 49,588 units in October, down from 50,017 units a year-ago while Honda Cars sales fell 8.5% to 14,234 units.Yoichiro Ueno, president and CEO, Honda Cars India said, “There have been some market disruptions on account of GST and additional cess implementation in the last few months which resulted in pre-buying ahead of festive period this year.”He said the company faced some supply constraints of few components due to which production of some models got impacted.In the two-wheeler segment, domestic sales for Honda2Wheeler declined 5.22% during the month by more than 4.66 lakh.Chennai-based TVS Motor Company said its domestic sales declined by more than 2.70 lakh units from more than 2.72 lakh units.Royal Enfield sold 68,014 units in India last month,a growth of 17% while Suzuki Motorcycle India said sales rose 26% to 46,020 units.“These figures reflect the dispatches to the dealers from the car makers in line with the expected demand in November. While the demand is expected to be good, growth in dispatches is mainly single digit as the festive season just ended. Overall, expect the PV industry to grow 10-12% in 2017-18,” said Abdul Majeed, partner, Price Waterhouse.
