India will be able to find a place in the top 50 nations in the World Bank’s ease of doing business rankings next year once the reforms on streamlining of taxation, including the implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime, is factored in, according to Minister of State for Commerce and Industry C.R. Chaudhary. Responding to a question on the impact of GST on India’s rank next year, the Minister said when issues regarding streamlining of taxation are sorted out, together with the proper implementation of the incentive system as well as healthy competition among States to attract domestic and foreign investments, they will help the country break into the top 50, most likely next year. The World Bank report, which assessed reforms implemented in 190 countries from June 2, 2016 to June 1, 2017, did not take GST into account as it could be rolled out only from July 1 this year. India was ranked 100th this year, up from 130th last year. On the parameter of ‘paying taxes,’ in which India’s rank improved from 172 last year to 119 this year, the bank had said, “India made paying taxes easier by making payment of EPF (Employees' Provident Fund) mandatory electronically and introducing a set of administrative measures easing compliance with corporate income tax. This reform applies to both Delhi and Mumbai.” Earlier, speaking at an event on ‘ease of doing business’ organised by the industry body Assocham, “We need to think about providing incentives to the industry and we have been simplifying the procedures.” He said the government had been implementing Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s vision of ‘minimum government and maximum governance’, adding that the government was committed to facilitating investments to boost growth. He said the European Union had given time till December 31 to India to meet its new Basmati rice import norms. The new EU norms aims to reduce the maximum residue limit (MRL) level for Tricyclazole (fungicide) in Basmati rice, and the norms are applicable to all rice-exporting countries. “The EU has asked us not to send Basmati rice to them because of some plague or technical points. We requested them to at least give us time, we have to make the farmer aware not to use this pesticide. They have given us time till December 31, 2017. But we have to maintain our quality,” the Minister said.
