The teething struggles with the implementation of the Goods & Services Tax (GST) notwithstanding, the tax reform measure seems to have helped draw a foreign company to set up shop in India. German Mirror Lubricants & Greases Co. FZE, a German company now based in the UAE, has entered the country with a distribution arrangement with Mumbai based AN Corp. The lubricant maker had considered India as a possible base, 18 years ago, before relocating to West Asia. The company plans to market its premium range of lubricants and greases to automobile, shipping and manufacturing customers in nine States in the first phase. Once business stabilises, it plans to invest in a blending plant. In 1999, German Mirror had zeroed in on India to relocate business operations as manufacturing had become expensive in Germany and India was known as a low-cost manufacturing base. “For competitive reasons, we wanted to relocate base to India but stayed away,” said Mohammed Hussein Hindi, MD, German Mirror, which sells its lubricants under the Mirr Oils brand. “That was in 1999. Because of the complicated tax structure in India and difficulty in running a business here, we shifted to Sharjah from Germany,” he said. In 2000, the firm set up its grease manufacturing and oil blending base in the UAE where it has invested more than $100 million. “Now with GST implemented, we found the business environment conducive to enter India. We may be late entrants, but the time is right,” he said. “India is the third-largest market in the world after China and USA, with 6% global market share. It has potential to be in the [top] two. We are evaluating market conditions to set up a lubricant oil blending plant in the near future,” Mr. Hindi said.The firm exports to more than 70 countries and supplies to Porsche, Daimler, Volvo, Cummins, MAN and Volkswagen.“Initially, we are targeting 0.5% share of the 2.3 million metric tonnes lubricants market in India,” said Kiran Hebbalkar, marketing & sales manager, Asia Pacific & Africa, German Mirror. Supplies would be from the UAE
The slowdown in the economy due to demonetisation and the impact of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) seems to have bottomed out, a FICCI survey said.The GDP growth is expected to improve to 6.2% in the second quarter of this financial year and to 6.7% in the third quarter.“According to the results of FICCI’s latest Economic Outlook Survey, GDP growth is expected to improve to 6.2% in Q2 of 2017-18 and further to 6.7% in Q3 of 2017-18,” the report said. “The slowdown in the economy due to demonetisation and the adjustment impact of GST implementation seems to be bottoming out and as the new indirect tax regime stabilises, the economy would see an improvement in its performance.” “The steps taken by the government to reduce the compliance burden related to GST and make its implementation smoother, the comprehensive plan announced for recapitalisation of the banks and the thrust laid on the infrastructure sector have been acknowledged by the survey participants as an indication of government’s clear resolve to address key issues that are hobbling growth,” it said. In a separate report, Nomura said it expects Gross Value Added (GVA) growth to quicken to 6.3% in the third quarter of the financial year, but added that this rebound is likely to take place after October, which witnessed a slowdown in activity due to the Goods and Services Tax. “We expect GVA growth to rebound to 6.3% y-o-y in Q3, up from 5.6% in Q2, confirming that the economy bottomed out in Q2,” the Nomura report said. “Early indicators for October, however, suggest a slowdown in activity. We believe the slowdown in October is due to an early onset of the festive season and GST-related issues (front-loaded exports in September) and activity should catch up in November-December.” Regarding inflation, the FICCI survey said that wholesale price index-based inflation for the year 2017-18 is likely to be about 2.8% and consumer price index-based inflation would be at 3.4%. “Given this outlook and the fact that supply side issues are largely responsible for the inflation movement in case of India, some of the economists mentioned that inflation targeting by the central bank may not be the correct approach,” the survey report said. “While asking for a review of the inflation targeting stance of the central bank and calibration of the policy rate giving equal importance to growth and inflation considerations, the participating economists also highlighted how a higher rate of interest leads to greater capital flows thereby putting pressure on the country’s currency exchange rate,” it added.
It is disquieting that India’s export growth is decelerating at a time when the global environment is becoming more conducive for trade, according to Crisil.Though the IMF expects global growth to rise to 3.6% in 2017 from 3.2% in 2016 and global merchandise trade is expected to grow stronger at 4.2%, boosting trade intensity of growth for the first time in six years (that is world trade growth being higher than world GDP growth), India’s exports have not been able to take as much advantage of the stronger trade growth unlike many of its Asian peers like Vietnam, South Korea and Indonesia, according to a Crisil statement.“... the subdued export performance in recent months cannot be attributed to unfavourable currency competitiveness,” it said, adding a relatively stable rupee and improving global growth suggest that domestic developments might have had a greater role to play in the current export growth slowdown — in particular the disruption caused by Goods and Services Tax (GST) implementation. “This is evident in the low export growth in sectors such as gems and jewellery, textiles, and leather.“Incidentally these sectors are also the most labour-intensive. So, employment in these sectors could have faced a setback,” Crisil added. Disruptions due to GST are transitory but structural issues plaguing these sectors need to be addressed to boost their competitiveness in the global market, it said.The competitiveness of these labour-intensive sectors has been on a sequential decline, according to the rating agency, adding that “high export growth, particularly in the labour-intensive sectors, is vital to sustain growth that is employment intensive.”
