India’s economy regained momentum in the September quarter as the manufacturing sector shrugged off any teething impact from the July 1 implementation of the Goods and Services Tax to propel gross domestic product (GDP) growth to 6.3%.GDP growth recovered in the second fiscal quarter from a three-year low of 5.7% in the preceding three-month period, while Gross Value Added (GVA) growth accelerated to 6.1% from 5.6% in the first quarter, according to official data released by the government on Thursday.“The GDP figure for Q2 at constant prices is 6.3% versus 7.5% in the second quarter of the previous financial year,” TCA Anant, Chief Statistician of India and Secretary to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, said at a press conference. “This reversal... in the trend is very encouraging.” GDP growth for the first half of the financial year (April-September) was 6% compared with 7.7% in the year-earlier period. GVA growth was at 5.8% compared with 7.2% over the same period. “This indicates that perhaps the impact of demonetisation and GST is now behind us and hopefully in the coming quarters we can look for an upward trajectory,” Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said. “The most significant aspect is that this quarter’s positive result has been impacted significantly by growth in manufacturing,” he added. The manufacturing sector expanded by 7% in the quarter, a robust acceleration from 1.2% in the first quarter. Still, the pace was slower than the 7.7% seen in the second quarter of 2016-2017. Other sectors that witnessed growth of more than 6% were electricity, gas, water supply and other utility services, and trade, hotels, transport and communication services related to broadcasting. “The latest set of numbers on growth... show that activity levels were recovering from the disruption caused in the first quarter,” Anis Chakravarty, lead economist, Deloitte India, wrote in a note, adding that the break-up showed improved performance by manufacturing that could have possibly been affected by the implementation of the GST. “High frequency indicators such as auto sales suggest that demand has recovered since then and manufacturing could see better numbers in the quarters ahead,” Mr. Chakravarty wrote. Agriculture, however, remained a cause for concern. “The sector that has performed worse is agriculture, which grew at 1.7%,” Mr. Anant said.“The performance in the agriculture sector has been held up by the non-crop sector. This year’s crop production, while higher than the five-year average, is lower than last year, which saw a strong growth.” The agriculture sector grew by 2.3% in the first quarter, and by 4.1% in the year-earlier period. Mr. Jaitley also highlighted the uptick in gross fixed capital formation, which grew by 4.7% in the second quarter compared with 1.6% in the first quarter. This improvement, the Finance Minister said, reflected a revival in investment levels. Experts are, however, pointing to the slowdown in the services sector, especially finance, transport, and hotels, all of which saw growth slowing in the second quarter compared with the first quarter. “The possible causes could be the larger working capital requirements faced by services sector (especially export- oriented ones) and teething process issues post-GST implementation,” Ranen Banerjee, Partner - Public Finance and Economics, at PwC India said.
While the rebound in GDP growth in the second quarter can act as a ‘confidence booster’ for the economy, the slowdown in the services sector, including finance, transport and hotels, as well as in agriculture is cause for concern, according to industry bodies and consultants.Ranen Banerjee, partner (public finance and economics), PwC India, said in a statement, “the GDP numbers for Q2 are not surprising and it is on expected lines given the re-stocking in manufacturing that has taken place in this quarter post the GST roll out.“We are, however, still experiencing slowdown in the services sector including finance, transport and hotels.” Possible causes for the slowdown include the larger working capital requirements faced by the services sector (especially export-oriented ones) and teething process issues post-GST implementation, he said. “We also possibly need to examine whether the 3 percentage point increase in tax rate on services — from an effective 15% pre-GST to 18% under GST — is causing some demand side impact. We will need to wait for Q3 and Q4 GDP numbers to be able to comment on this more conclusively,” he added. Assocham secretary general D.S. Rawat said, “... agriculture remains an area of concern with a mere 1.7% in the second quarter against 2.3% in the previous quarter. Setbacks in the agri performance can have a cascading impact on consumer inflation.” Chandrajit Banerjee, director general, CII, said, “The rebound in GDP growth to 6.3%, after the uninspiring performance of the previous quarter is noteworthy and a great confidence booster.” The revival of the GDP growth print reinforces the perception that the economy is on a robust recovery phase and the short-term disruptions caused by demonetisation and GST are behind us, he added.
“What is encouraging is that manufacturing has emerged as a key driver of growth indicating that firms have started restocking and recovery is taking shape. Gross fixed capital formation has also picked up from last year’s lacklustre pace,” he said. Pankaj Patel, president, FICCI, said, “The monetary policy announcement next week will be a perfect timing to give another shot to boost the sentiment. Also, the government should look at further consolidating its reform agenda in the Union Budget to be announced two months from now to give further boost to investment.” Vaibhav Agrawal, Head of Research, Angel Broking, said in a statement: “With the lower base of third and fourth quarter and with ongoing recovery, we believe that second half GDP numbers are likely to be far better than first half and we believe that FY18 GDP growth is likely to be around 7%.”
The Goods and Services Tax (GST) appears to have had an immediate and significant impact on economic growth, according to tax analysts and government officials.The fiscal second quarter (July-September), which coincided with the July 1 roll-out of GST, saw GDP growth accelerate to 6.3%, from 5.7% in the first quarter. The new indirect tax regime had an impact — both in terms of the methodology of calculating GDP, as well as on the performance of the input parameters themselves.
“In a normal year, businesses are conversant with the tax processes, and so know their tax liability, so the collections are usually in line with what is anticipated,” TCA Anant, Chief Statistician of India and Secretary to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, said on Thursday. “However, this year, the uncertainty surrounding GST procedures, and the leeway the government has given in terms of extended deadlines, has meant that the indirect tax collections for the particular period are still being updated.” Gross Domestic Product (GSP) is calculated by adding the indirect taxes figure to Gross Value Added (GVA), and subtracting subsidies, Mr. Anant said, highlighting the reason that GST collections are so crucial for accurate GDP computation.“On the one hand, there would possibly have been some disruption in the early days of GST due to the uncertainty surrounding the new processes,” Anis Chakravarty, Lead Economist at Deloitte India, told The Hindu. “On the other hand, net taxes are added back to the GVA and somewhat lower collections on the GST front could have had some dampening effect as compared to a non-GST year.” Mr. Anant said the GDP data for the second quarter could see an upward revision when the government released its revised estimates as it would reflect the final indirect tax collections — a figure that would include the taxes collected from late filers as well. “The Q2 growth pick up is almost entirely due to the growth pick up in manufacturing, which came to a standstill prior to GST due to destocking,” D.K. Srivastava, Chief Policy Advisor at EY India, said. “When GST got implemented, then orders started flowing in and growth picked up. So, GST has had a major impact on this quarter’s growth rate. In the coming quarters, the GST reforms in terms of rates and compliance should play a significant part in manufacturing sector growth.”
Mr. Anant said services was another area impacted by GST as earlier sales tax data was used to gauge activity. “What we looked at instead was the sales tax collections for items that are currently outside GST, and what we found was that there is a stable ratio between those collections and overall sales tax collections in the past,” Mr. Anant said. “So, we used that as the basis to estimate services sector activity in this quarter.” According to tax analysts, the services sector, especially hotels and restaurants, have suffered due to the increase in their effective tax rate under GST, and so the tax collection data from these sectors could be dampened.
