Under GST, while under-construction houses attract 12% tax, the quantum of tax rebates available to real estate firms on the final product is substantial as the tax already paid on raw materials is substantial at 18%. Photo: Hemant Mishra/MintNew Delhi: Real estate developers are likely to be the first to face investigations by the new anti-profiteering watchdog for allegedly denying consumers the benefit of reduced tax burden under the goods and services tax (GST) regime that kicked in from 1 July.A standing committee of officials attached to the recently set up National Anti-profiteering Authority (NAA) has received several complaints of builders not passing on the benefit of lower taxes under the GST regime, some of which will be taken up for investigation if there is prima facie evidence of profiteering, said a person aware of discussions in the authority.The NAA, chaired by senior bureaucrat B.N. Sharma, will direct the Director General of Safeguards, an investigating body within the Central Board of Excise and Customs, to probe the issue, said the person, who spoke on condition of anonymity.Under GST, while under-construction houses attract a 12% tax, the quantum of tax rebates available to the developer on the final product is substantial as the tax already paid on raw materials such as cement and steel is substantial at 18%.In the earlier indirect tax regime, the central government charged a 15% service tax on 30% of the value of under-construction flats, which worked out to 4.5%. This, together with the 4-5% value-added tax levied by state governments on work contracts, took the total tax burden to about 9% without input tax credit.In GST, the rate is 12% with input tax credit. The high component of tax credits means that the effective tax burden in the new regime is lower than earlier, explained the person cited earlier.“Ideally, builders should reduce the equated monthly instalment (EMI) to be paid by consumers. However, some developers are claiming higher input costs and change in business strategy to increase (the tax-exclusive) price correspondingly. If they are increasing the price, they have to give justification, which has to pass the test of reasonableness,” the person said.Another official aware of the complaints, who also declined to be named, said, “We have received complaints against builders from across India. The common tenor of the complaint is that the builders have increased the prices of the houses citing GST. The complaints will now be looked into as the anti-profiteering authority has now been set up.”Experts, however, said the anti-profiteering provision in GST may not be sufficient to ensure that the benefits of reduced tax burden reach consumers as nothing in the law prevents businesses from jacking up prices in a free market, unless the product is under the Essential Commodities Act. Policymakers too believe that the anti-profiteering provision in GST law is not foolproof, which might result in litigation.The investigator will require businesses suspected of profiteering to give a justification for any price increase made soon after the GST regime came into force. “Business reasons for price increase have to be weighed in the scale of rationality and reasonableness. Price increase should not be an attempt by the business to corner the tax benefit,” explained the first person cited earlier.NAA is empowered to order a business it finds to be engaged in profiteering to cut prices or return the undue benefit availed by it along with interest to the customer. In extreme cases, the watchdog can also impose a penalty on the defaulting business or cancel its GST registration.“Anti-profiteering will certainly apply to real estate because developers are not passing on any benefits to customers. The tax rates under GST have increased but they are getting more input tax credit. So at least some benefits have to be passed on to consumers,” said Abhishek Rastogi, partner at law firm Khaitan and Co.The government recently released a form that customers can use to file complaints against manufacturers not passing on the benefits of the lower taxes in the GST regime to consumers. A complainant will have to provide details like the price of the product and the applicable tax rates both in the pre- and post-GST era.
Nearly 10 million tax payers have registered themselves on the goods and services tax network (GSTN). Photo: Pradeep Gaur/MintNew Delhi: With nearly 10 million taxpayers registering themselves on the goods and services tax (GST) network, or GSTN, the information technology backbone of the new indirect tax regime is initiating the process of mining data to detect tax evasion and analyse taxpayer behaviour.GSTN will soon float a request for proposal (RFP) from data analytics companies to analyse data after meeting central and state government officials and understanding their requirements.To be sure, GSTN will start data analytics when it has sufficient data spanning a year.GST was rolled out in July this year and the tax returns started coming in August.“We are in the process of drafting an RFP because we want the tools and manpower for data analytics. We should be able to slice and dice the data whichever way we want,” said Prakash Kumar, chief executive officer of GSTN.“Once the HSN code starts coming in for a few months, we will know which item is going where,” Kumar said, adding that the data can help tax authorities study region-wise patterns as well as user behaviour.Along with registration, return and payment processes, business intelligence analytics is also part of the GSTN’s mandate.The data analytics providers will build an interface between the data and the tax authorities to help the latter detect tax evasion.R. Muralidharan, senior director at Deloitte in India said the entire sales and purchase data will be available with GSTN.“The data can be used in many ways. Sales, purchases and margins could be compared to industry averages. Further, eventually, this data could be linked to the direct tax database to see if the profitability and subsequent taxes paid are in line with the turnover,” Muralidharan said.GST is a destination-based tax that aims to remove barriers across states and integrate the country into a common market. The technology backbone of this tax requires all suppliers in the credit chain to upload their invoices onto GSTN for claiming input tax credit. This means that all suppliers are forced to document their sales and raise invoices. The government expects that the rollout of this tax will increase the taxpayer base, reduce the size of the informal economy and check tax evasion.GSTN has already used some of the initial data trends to alert states about the tax paying pattern of some taxpayers; for instance, if a taxpayer is using input tax creditor or cash to pay the tax due. Input tax credit is the tax paid at every sale in the supply chain that can be claimed as credit. Some states like Karnataka, Maharashtra and Rajasthan are also matching the data with their earlier value-added tax database to understand the new taxpayer base.Of the nearly 10 million tax payers registered in the GST regime, around 7 million are old tax payers and 3 million are new.
Graphic: Naveen Kumar Saini/MintIndia’s merchandise export growth of 30.56% for November 2017, compared with a year ago, looks wonderful until you recollect that November 2016 was the month when demonetisation started.Exports had dipped sharply then, and the very high year-on-year growth for November 2017, therefore, reflects the effect of this low base.It’s also possible that some exports deferred in October 2017 due to goods and services tax (GST) issues happened in November, which takes off some more of the shine.Chart 1 gives the absolute export figures, which show the level of exports in November 2017 was lower than in September.But that doesn’t mean we should be pessimistic about exports.First, global manufacturing growth is accelerating. The flash Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for December in the US was at an 11-month high; for the euro zone, at a 212-month high; for Japan, it was at a 46-month high.The JP Morgan Global Manufacturing PMI for November 2017 was at an 80-month high.Manufacturing worldwide is on a high.This global manufacturing revival is good news for India’s merchandise exports. Engineering goods exports have done very well in recent months, although part of the reason could be the rise in prices of iron and steel, which are classified as “engineering goods”.Engineering exports were up 43% year-on-year in November, and they account for almost a quarter of the country’s exports.A word of caution here: one reason why steel exports, for instance, have been high is because domestic demand has not been strong. That is likely to change as the domestic capex cycle turns.Is the strong rupee responsible for the tepid growth in exports?Several economists believe the rupee is overvalued.Prof. Vijay Joshi said in his recent L.K. Jha memorial lecture, “The question arises: Is it wise to have an appreciating real exchange rate, given the need to maintain the competitiveness of exports, especially labour-intensive exports? It is hard to think of any country that has achieved sustained rapid growth without rapid growth in its exports. But India’s exports have been growing slowly. Slow growth of world trade has obviously harmed India’s exports in the present decade, in common with other countries. But India’s share of world exports, which need not be tied to the growth of world trade, has also totally stagnated over the same period. One has to wonder whether the real exchange rate is partly responsible.”Chart 2 shows the rapid rise in the Reserve Bank of India’s estimates of real effective exchange rate (REER) in recent months. But this is contentious territory—according to the REER computed by the Bank for International Settlements, the Indian rupee is only slightly overvalued, while the Chinese yuan is much more overvalued. Perhaps it’s best to do the hard work of improving export competitiveness rather than rely on quick fixes.Of course, there are also headwinds to export growth. The IMF’s World Economic Outlook (chart 3) estimated that growth in the volume of goods exports from developing Asia in 2018 and 2019 will be slower than in the current year.
ITC trades at a price to earnings multiple of 25 times its estimated FY19 earnings, based on the mean of analyst estimates compiled by Reuters. Photo: Indranil Bhoumik/MintITC Ltd’s shares have not recovered from the blow dealt by the steep hike in cess on cigarettes. Even five months down the line, there were no signs investors were doing a rethink. Could last week’s Karnataka high court ruling change that?The court struck down government rules requiring larger graphic warnings on packs. A Reuters report said the government will appeal the decision in the Supreme Court, indicating that the legal process will take some time. Still, this is one bright spot. If the rule is eventually struck down, it will benefit ITC in the longer run but the more immediate crisis is the steep increase in taxes.Between early July, when goods and services tax (GST) was introduced, and now, the broad FMCG sector’s valuations have moved way ahead of ITC’s. The chart alongside shows how Hindustan Unilever Ltd—a company often compared with ITC Ltd—has done and also the BSE FMCG Index. In contrast, ITC has performed poorly.The pessimism is not without reason. Cigarette volume growth took a hit as the cess led to a sharp hike in prices which in turn affected demand. It also raised the policy risk quotient, as the move was seen more as a means to discourage cigarette smoking than to simply raise revenue. That raises the spectre of more hikes.The first test of whether the screws will be tightened should be known in early 2018, when the Budget will be announced. As of now, the duties on cigarettes have not been hiked further. If cigarette duty rates are left where they are, in time their effect on growth will lessen.The general improvement in valuations of consumer stocks itself could be another factor. ITC trades at a price to earnings multiple of 25 times its estimated FY19 earnings, based on the mean of analyst estimates compiled by Reuters. That’s not cheap but it hinges on an earnings growth of 13%. If ITC’s earnings show a possibility of growing higher, those valuations could get more reasonable. Compare that with HUL’s valuations of 47 times with earnings growth of 17% in the same period.The focus should shift back to how the twin engines of its cigarettes and FMCG business perform. In the September quarter, the unexpected duty hike affected profit growth in cigarettes. That negative impact should not be visible, or at least not as strongly, in the December quarter. The extent to which profit growth of cigarettes recovers, in comparison to September quarter’s growth, is one factor to watch for.ITC’s FMCG business should benefit similar to its peers, with indications that trade channels are settling down post-GST. Urban markets are recovering though rural appears to be taking time. While sales growth in the September quarter was good, with comparable sales growth of 10%, this should continue and perhaps improve.The worst on the tax front is already out in the open. The main risks are from taxes being hiked further, which seems unlikely at least in the near term, and from further policy measures to discourage tobacco consumption. Barring these, ITC’s shares could correct the gap that has developed between it and its peers, based on the uptrend in the sector’s valuations and if its cigarettes business steadies itself in the December quarter.
Taxpayers with annual aggregate turnover up to Rs1.5 crore in the previous financial year or anticipated in the current financial year can avail the option of filing quarterly returns. Photo: Pradeep Gaur/MintNew Delhi: Goods and services tax network (GSTN), the IT backbone of the new tax regime, on Monday said it has put a new function on its portal to allow taxpayers choose the frequency of filing GSTR 1 form on quarterly or monthly basis.Taxpayers with annual aggregate turnover up to Rs1.5 crore in the previous financial year or anticipated in the current financial year can avail the option of filing quarterly returns. Form GSTR 1 summarises all the sales of a taxpayer.This has been done as per decision taken in the 23rd GST Council meeting. After giving their option, taxpayers can file GSTR 1 for the relevant return periods, the GSTN said in a statement.It further said that taxpayers who opt for quarterly filing will have to select the last month of the quarter from the drop down menu. Further, all taxpayers who opt for monthly filing can now file GSTR 1 from August onwards till November. Filing of return of previous month is mandatory.GSTN has been set up to provide IT infrastructure and services to the central as well as state governments, taxpayers and other stakeholders for implementation of the GST, which came into force on 1 July this year.