Slow implementation of the new real estate regulation across the country as well as uncertainty over the impact of good and services tax (GST) on home prices have pulled down consumer sentiment in the last one year, said real estate consultants and developers. Photo: Aniruddha Chowdhury/MintMumbai: Home loan interest rates have dipped, but buyers’ sentiments have not improved, data shows, leading to a sharp fall in home loan growth.Home loan growth in April-October fell 32.7% from a year ago, one of the biggest declines in the last five years, data from the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) showed. In the same period in 2016, home loan growth was down 4.27%, while in 2015, it was up 26.89%.Slow implementation of the new real estate regulation across the country as well as uncertainty over the impact of good and services tax (GST) on home prices have pulled down consumer sentiment in the last one year, said real estate consultants and developers.In May this year, the new Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act took effect.Besides, the first few months of this financial year saw the lingering effects of demonetisation which had impacted the overall market both at the supply and demand ends, they said The decline in home loan growth comes at a time when interest rates have been falling. In the last two years, home loan rates have come down by 150-200 basis points. A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.“Three events have slowed down the real estate market in the last one year. First it was demonetisation, then because of RERA new launches came down dramatically. Thirdly, GST has increased the cost. All these have brought down the sentiment and as a result sales have been slow,” said Anuj Puri, chairman, Anarock Property Consultants, a real estate advisory firm. Apart from few states like Maharashtra, Gujarat and Rajasthan, most others are yet to implement the new regulations, creating a lot of uncertainty in the minds of consumers. Most customers are waiting for RERA-approved projects, he added.Ashutosh Khajuria, executive director, Federal Bank Ltd, also agreed that RERA and GST have slowed down the overall home loan industry. “Consumers will take time to get used to the new (tax) rates due to GST. They will take time to sink in...There is a temporary blip. I think from next financial year it should get better,” he said.Under the new tax structure, buying under-construction properties attracts a net effective rate of 12% as against the earlier rate of around 5.5% (including value-added tax and service tax).Hit by demonetisation, home sales dipped by 41% in the October to December period last year across eight major cities as compared to the same period the previous year, while launches fell an even sharper by 61%, as per data from property consultant firm Knight Frank. However, sales started picking up by the first quarter of this financial year.According to Liases Foras, another property advisory firm, homes sales grew by 6% in the June quarter over the preceding three months.“The first six months of the year were slow. However, we are seeing a huge pick-up since September. We have seeing a great comeback and the numbers will improve as we go into the next year,” said Boman Irani, vice-president, Confederation of Real Estate Developers Association of India (Credai), a real estate body. Irani, who is also chairman and managing director of Mumbai-based Keystone Realtors Pvt. Ltd, said the confusion over RERA has settled down in Maharashtra and this will help improve consumer sentiment by next year.“Real estate market has been down even before RERA came in... Demand for affordable housing is there but the pickup is slow. People may have applied for some of the affordable housing schemes and are still waiting,”said Pritesh Bumb, analyst, Prabhudas Lilladher, a Mumbai-based brokerage firm.
Mumbai:American tech major Microsoft will be focusing more on the government and the small business segment to grow its India revenues, a top official has said.“The SMB (Small and Medium Businesses) segment and the segments around digital India (and) government would be clear areas of focus for us in addition to all the work around enterprise and consumer that we have been doing,” Microsoft India president Anant Maheshwari told PTI. He pegged the overall information technology opportunity in the country at $107 billion, but declined to break down the contribution of the government and small businesses in it.Refusing to disclose the revenue contribution from the country, he said India is one of the top 14 priority regions for the company and a “faster growing market”. The company has two lakh enterprise customers in the country, apart from 9,000 partners and also works with 5,000 startups. On the government side, it serves the centre as well as 29 states, he said.When asked about home-grown IT companies’ reservations about working with the government, especially with the way contracts are structured and also with regard to timely payments, Maheshwari conceded that there are “challenges” in every market. “In any exciting geography in the world, there are always challenges to do business and India is no different,” he explained.“The government has recognised that over the last couple of years with all the focus on ease of doing business, there are some improvements,” he said. When asked about the implementation of goods and services tax (GST) resulting in some tax notices to IT players, Maheshwari said Microsoft sees the indirect tax reform as a big opportunity.“There may be some challenges as the tax regime transitions, but broadly for me, I would think of GST as a massive opportunity for anybody who is trying to do digital transition,” he said. The company employs over 8,000 people in the country who work out of nine offices in various cities. Apart from serving the local market, its staff, the largest in any country outside of the US, also serves the global needs, especially on delivery, research and innovation.On the rising protectionism and whether its business is affected by the stance of the US President Donald Trump administration, Maheshwari seemed to suggest that it has not had a major impact. The issue around visa fees, one of the major concerns for the industry, is not a “significant” topic for the company, he said, underscoring that its view on the issue is in sync with the industry lobby Nasscom.The company’s cloud customer-base has risen in the last few months from India, which will result in a review of the infrastructure capabilities, he said. However, it may not necessarily result in any new data centre or facilities here, he said. “We have seen a very strong uptick on the public cloud in the last six months, which automatically causes us to look at our capacity and our capacity planning going forward,” Maheshwari said.“The way to look at capacity planning is not to look at new locations. But also existing locations by ramping up. That is something we will continue to do as we go forward.” The company competes with tech giants like Amazon and Google for cloud play. Last week, it disclosed that it works with 70 of the 100 top listed companies.
With the hurdles now history, the companies, especially electronic goods and appliances makers, are gearing up to bring innovative products to woo consumers to showrooms in 2018. Photo: Indranil Bhoumik/MintNew Delhi:Recovering from the double impact of demonetisation and goods and services tax (GST) implementation, fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) companies and consumer durable firms are pinning hopes on 2018 that improved market sentiment will bring them back to the growth path.With the streamlining of the process after GST implementation behind them, the companies feel that the prospects of good economic growth, coupled with a revival in demand and consumption, will help them overcome the hit they took in volumes and profits in 2017. Interestingly, these firms believe that the demand should be evenly distributed between urban and rural markets.“With the market sentiment showing signs of improvement and stability returning post-GST implementation, we expect the demand scenario to move up, both in rural and urban markets,” Dabur India chief financial officer (CFO) Lalit Malik told PTI. Expressing similar views, Emami Ltd director Harsha Vardhan Agarwal said retail and rural businesses have bounced back fully and are growing in healthy double digits while wholesale channel is yet to recover fully at about 80% of the base.“We believe that economic reforms like GST and demonetisation would help drive economic growth in a structured way in the long term and we expect further improvement in our performance in coming quarters,” he said. Sony India head of sales Satish Padmanabhan also said the industry is already seeing “positive comeback signs post the implementation of GST and expects 2018 to only be better”.Recollecting challenges faced in 2017, Godrej Consumer Products Limited business head (India and SAARC) Sunil Kataria said, “Demonetisation was a black swan event for the Indian economy. Among many challenges, the biggest disruption was caused in the distribution network for FMCG companies.”Dabur India CFO Lalit Malik said: “In the short term, both demonetisation and GST impacted wholesale trade because of issues related to execution and led to a massive amount of destocking across the trade channel.”“2017 was an eventful year for the broader Indian economy, our industry and our business. We went through some ups and downs given the two major reforms of demonetisation and GST during the year,” Whirlpool India managing director Sunil D’Souza said.With the hurdles now history, the companies, especially electronic goods and appliances makers, are gearing up to bring innovative products to woo consumers to showrooms in 2018. “In 2018, we will continue to bring industry first innovations for Indian consumers with an exciting line-up of future-ready products,” said Rajeev Bhutani, Samsung India vice president, consumer electronics business.Samsung will kickstart 2018 with the world’s first innovation in the AC segment that would take the consumer convenience and comfort to the next level, he claimed. Likewise, Padmanabhan said Sony India will continue to roll out “technologically advanced products across categories in future and keep our customers engaged with Sony products”.Panasonic India is also not lagging in its plans for new products with a major transition in portfolio and positioning in the offing. “We will strengthen as a comprehensive consumer electronics maker to offer solutions that fulfils the wishes of customers while improving our individual products,” said Manish Sharma, Panasonic India and South Asia president and CEO.When contacted, a spokesperson for LG India said, “Product leadership is the key and we will continue bringing newer technologies based on Indian consumer insights.” With the government pushing for domestic manufacturing, Sharma, who is also president of Consumer Electronics and Appliances Manufacturers Association (CEAMA), said the industry expects ratio of local manufacturing to increase, going forward.“The industry acknowledges the pro-industry reforms undertaken by the government and is looking forward to the Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP) policy in 2018, which in turn will boost indigenous manufacturing,” he added. PTI 
The Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) recently issued a clarification regarding applicability of Goods and Services Tax (GST) on under-construction and ready-to-move-in property. GST was implemented on 1 July 2017. Read more about how GST will be charged when you buy a house, at what rate and at what stage.No GST on completed propertiesTransfer of completed property is not considered as rendering services to a buyer and thus does not attract GST. According to the CBEC's recent clarification, “Sale of building is an activity or consideration which is neither a supply of goods nor a supply of services. (Para 5 of schedule III of the CGST Act, 2017).” So if you buy a completed property, it will help you save money in form of tax.GST applies to under-construction propertiesIf you are buying an under-construction property, it is considered as availing a service from the builder; hence, you are supposed to pay GST on it. According to the GST law, construction of a building, complex or a part of it, intended for sale to a buyer, attracts GST on the sale price. However, the tax should not be charged if the property is being bought after the issuance of completion certificate by a government authority or after the property has undergone occupation, which means it is a case of resale.An under-construction property attracts GST at the rate of 18%. But it is not charged on the entire value of the property; it is charged only on two-third of the value. One-third value of the property is considered as the cost of land. According to CBEC, “effective rate of GST payable on purchase of under-construction residential or commercial properties from builder involving transfer of interest in land or individual share of land to the buyer is 12% with full input tax credit (ITC).”In case the property that you have bought has been under-construction since 2015 and will get completed in 2018, then the amount paid or invoice raised before 1 July 2017 should have attracted a service tax at the rate of 4.5%. But any payment made towards purchase of the house or property after 1 July 2017 will attract GST at the rate of 12%.Also, real estate services which do not include transfer of land rights attract GST on the entire amount. According to CBEC, “consideration which doesn’t constitute transfer in land or undivided share of land as part of consideration, such as construction services provided by a sub-contractor to the builder, attract GST at the standard rate of 18% with full ITC.”Developer or service providers are expected to pass on the benefit of ITC to homebuyers, which will eventually bring down the total impact of tax on property value.