Harvard University professor Gita Gopinath sees government reforms such as PSU bank recapitalisation plan and the insolvency and bankruptcy code as steps in the right direction for the Indian economy. Photo: Ramesh Pathania/MintMumbai: If there was no demonetisation, the government would have been able to implement the goods and services tax (GST) in a better manner, said Gita Gopinath, professor of international studies and economics at Harvard University, in an interview. She said that among other government reforms, the PSU bank recapitalisation plan and the implementation of the insolvency and bankruptcy code are steps in the right direction.Edited excerpts:There have been some big-bang reforms since November last year. How do you think the government has fared on executing them?As far as demonetisation is concerned, the expectation that the currency would not come back was misplaced. The idea that the RBI (Reserve Bank of India) will be able to make a big transfer to the government was misplaced. It was a very good signalling device that the government was very serious about cracking down on corruption and black money. But I do not think it was very effective in curbing it. For the consequences for the economy, we do not have clear causal evidence but there is the suggestion that the slowdown of growth rate had something to do with demonetisation. I am still studying it and we are trying to get some data from RBI on this as well.GST has also been implemented with hiccups…In fact, GST has a much better ability to track and prevent black money as compared to demonetisation. Maybe if they had not done demonetisation, the government would have had more time at hand to iron out all the problems with GST implementation. Among other reforms, plan to recapitalize the banks and the implementation of the bankruptcy code are steps in the right direction. Since demonetisation, most of the reforms have been favourable. I think it heartening to see that they are responding quickly to the issues at hand. Each time you put in a new policy, there are going to be problem,s but the fact that they are acting fast is good. It is early days but this is a policy that has great potential to formalize the economy. It will take a couple of quarters for the GST impact to show on the fiscal deficit when they are able to iron out all the matters.Investment has been slow and it is yet to pick up. How soon will we see it picking up?That had a lot to do with the non-performing assets (NPAs) in the system and now they (government and RBI) have made a bigger push on it (to resolve them). So hopefully, that should free up lending by banks. This could be the beginning of the credit cycle moving up. The recent numbers have already started showing some uptick. In fact, weak investment has been a problem globally and is not an India-specific phenomenon for different reasons.Will the recapitalization exercise help because the DNA of banks remains the same?Recapitalization is the first step in the whole process. They (banks) have to make sure that they do not find themselves in the exact same situation a few years from now. You definitely do not want to create a situation where banks can do whatever they want to do and then get bailed out. But I believe they (government) are considering policies for that. Recapitalization has helped in many parts of the world. It helped in the US after the financial crisis. The credit growth and investment will not pick up overnight but this is a reasonable step.We are seeing a single party consolidating its position across India, as is evident from the Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh elections. How is this being viewed globally?Within India and outside there is expectation that this government is the most reform-minded at this point and most likely to implement reforms. So anything that signals that the government will be empowered seems to signal optimism that the reforms will continue. It is viewed very positively, especially by the international investors. It is a big deal for them.There are worries that with general elections nearing, the government may announce a populist budget and overshoot its fiscal deficit targets.It is common before the elections to be populist. The government has surprised in the past. Before demonetisation as well as when the economy was growing slowly, people expected them to breach the fiscal threshold and in fact (Arvind) Panagariya was in favour of breaching the limits but that did not happen. So it may not be this time as well. I hope they do not do anything crazy on the fiscal side.Central banks are on an unwinding spree globally. Are there any negative implications for global growth due to this?It will certainly reduce the easy availability of money globally. But if you look at where these developed economies are going to end up in terms of interest rates, that is not very high. The central banks are doing it very gradually. The rate increases by Fed (US Federal Reserve) have not had so much of an effect. I do not see this as a negative factor.Is it a concern that asset valuations are not reflecting the impact of this unwinding by central banks?The last time the markets were spooked was during the taper tantrum when it (action by the Federal Reserve) was completely unexpected. But now the central bank is doing a pretty good job at communicating what they are going to do and they are moving very slow. The unwinding has been very gradual. The other fundamentals have improved with the commodity prices going back up. The standard correction has to come about after recession. Growth comes back up and it is very normal. I would worry if the markets were to be spooked at this point of time because that would mean that the market is completely addicted to easy money. We may see more investment in the export sector as globally growth picks up.Will we see any impact on foreign fund inflows into India, considering that the Fed is expected to raise rates further?The rate hike and the US tax policy will make it more attractive to put money in the US. But I do not think the numbers will change that much for capital inflows into India. In fact, that is one area where India has done very well. Investors are now being very discerning about where they put their money and I think India is looked at very favourably.With the option of flexible inflation targeting available, do you think RBI could have cut rates further to boost investment?I think the problem of weak investment does not have much to do with interest rates but NPAs. Since Raghuram Rajan’s regime, interest rates were cut multiple times but we did not see any uptick in investment.What are the major risks to growth for India?Most important is commodity prices. It seems to have a very high pass-through for inflation in India. It has consequences not only for the monetary policy but fiscal policy as well. India has been very lucky in the past three years because of low commodity prices but that is changing and could be a problem. Again, I would be concerned if the government becomes fiscally irresponsible before the elections.2017 has been such a perfect year for the markets that it makes many people—including us—nervous that how can something be so good and easy in equity markets, says Arora. Photo: Bloomberg
The close verdict in the Gujarat assembly election will put pressure on the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) to deliver on infrastructure and rural-related issues, Samir Arora, founder and fund manager of Helios Capital, said in an interview.State elections due in 2018 would not be as crucial as the Gujarat poll, Arora said and added that from a market point of view, the BJP would not have to win a super majority in 2019.“Even if they lose a few seats here and there, but are still firmly ahead, we will have the same management at the centre for another term, and that is what the markets will ultimately bet on,” he said.Edited excerpts:India in 2018—what are the risks? Will it be upcoming state elections and oil, or will global forces be at play, too?Generally, all markets and, particularly, Indian markets randomly have 10% type corrections even without any real reasons. This has not happened this year, but has happened frequently in the past. We expect more volatility in 2018 and lower returns than 2017.2017 has been such a perfect year for markets that it makes many people—including us—nervous that how can something be so good and easy in equity markets. In addition, many small cap and mid cap stocks have had massive gains and any negative trigger—global or local, economic or political—could lead to a significant correction in these stocks.Overall, we still expect and hope to make reasonable returns during 2018, but remain vigilant for adverse developments.How do you see Indian equities in 2018? Are valuations a concern? Can the earnings momentum be sustained? Any concerns that the country may see a large markets correction?Performance of Indian markets will depend on what happens to global markets. India can outperform global markets but we are not in a situation where we can go up while world markets are down over an extended period. In that sense, realistically we are followers and not leaders—US is the only real leader in this regard which does not need to depend so much on how other markets are doing to decide its own course.On the other hand, there is no reason to expect that there is any serious India-related reason which can lead to a severe stand-alone market correction in India.Will it be so easy to make money from the markets in 2018, as was the case this year? Do you share the view that any and every correction in the market is an opportunity to buy?Money-making will not be as easy as it has been in 2017. However, making money in general should not be expected to be easy in any scenario. Investors will definitely buy into the first dip, for they are now programmed to do that; problem will come if there is a second dip, for we don’t exactly know how domestic investors will react if there is a sustained correction—i.e. will they try to lock in their gains by selling or will they invest more.We are positive on the market for 2018. Globally, markets are doing well and, therefore, strength in Indian markets does not jar anyone.Additionally, we have some more positives we can look forward to, including improvement in earnings, as short-term negative effects of demonetisation and GST (goods and services tax) run down and general improvement in global growth helps cyclical sectors.With regard to Indian equities, what are the sectors that you are overweight on and why? Similarly, what sectors are you underweight on?We invest only in a few sectors and believe that bottom-up stock selection works best in sectors where there is strong tailwind. Our portfolio is invariably concentrated in financials, consumer and infrastructure sectors, and over the long term we have also liked technology/pharmaceutical sectors although for the past 18 months we have had limited exposure to tech/pharma. We generally don’t invest in commodity sector or in state-owned companies, but there is always an exception to these rules.What is your reading on the impact of the Gujarat results going into 2018. How should investors view this and upcoming elections in 2018?Gujarat elections were important from a market point of view and the result is positive. The most important outcome is that there is continuity of government and policies for another term.The close result will also put some pressure on the BJP government to deliver on infrastructure/rural related issues with urgency, and that will be most welcome.The other elections coming up in 2018 are not as crucial as the Gujarat elections was. We also believe that purely from a market point of view, the BJP does not have to win a super majority in 2019 for us to be positive. Even if they lose a few seats here and there, but are still firmly ahead, we will have the same management at the centre for another term, and that is what the markets will ultimately bet on.Now that the big reforms are behind us, do you see Prime Minister Narendra Modi turning populist and shunning other big reforms till the 2019 general elections?There are not many big reforms that we or anyone else is waiting for. If the government can sell off Air India to a strategic investor and hand over management control, it would classify as a big reform.Otherwise, in any case, government should focus on implementation of previous promises. We believe that government should focus on more and faster road building, ironing out practical problems faced by businesses on GST, starting the process of cutting corporate income tax rates to 25% as promised, solving income tax issues of start-ups and generally pushing along programmes already announcedWhen it comes to India’s capex cycle coming back, most analysts have got it wrong for two years or more. What is your forecast here?We don’t believe the capex cycle is turning. New companies everywhere are investing in new technology and creating new products and markets, but there is decline everywhere of old capital-guzzling sectors.If Indian airline companies order hundreds of planes from Boeing or Airbus, the capex is not in India even though India is seeing growth. If SoftBank invests billions of dollars in Indian private companies, you see a lot of spending but very limited capital expenditure. If capex picks up it will be good, but we are not wasting our time waiting for it with bated breath.What are your expectations on foreign portfolio flows into India next year?Foreign portfolio flows have been very small this year. We used to get an average of $20 billion per year previously. This year, flows have been muted; perhaps all markets are doing well and no one is feeling left out only because they did not invest in India.Over time, flows will come back for India offers potential for more sustained growth. It is also possible that portfolio flows are less because the same end-investor has instead chosen to invest in private equity and venture investments in India which are seeing good flows these days.The weakness in GST collections following a 1 July roll-out has pushed down overall revenue growth. Photo: iStockA slowdown in tax collections is pushing Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s administration to be more vigilant on compliance.
Collections under the new goods and services tax (GST) dipped to Rs83,300 crore ($13 billion) in October from about Rs92,000 crore the previous month, and the central bank is wary of a further dip after the government lowered rates on several items to win public support before state elections. The weakness in GST collections following a 1 July roll-out has pushed down overall revenue growth.In response, India’s tax office this month asked officials to compare payments made by the top 100 assesses in each of their zones to understand variations in pre- and post-GST payments, according to an internal letter seen by Bloomberg News. “For the purposes of collecting this data, the officers may contact the assesses personally and/or visit their premises,” the note said. Finance ministry spokesman D.S. Malik declined to comment.Reports of evasion are already coming in with the GST being decried as technologically tedious and expensive. Lower revenue risks are worsening Asia’s widest budget deficit and extending the region’s steepest jump in bond yields this quarter. Constant tinkering with the GST also makes it harder for the government to prepare its budget for the year starting 1 April.“It would be challenging to estimate the projected collections for the next year based on the actual collections for the past four months as these months have seen a lot of changes in rates and processes,” M.S. Mani, partner at Deloitte India, said in an interview this week. “Any deficiency in the collections could add to the pressure on tax authorities to achieve the targets.”The permission for tax officials to visit individuals personally goes against a recent attempt by the government to boost the use of technology in tax assessments and make the process less invasive.India has seven taxpayers for every 100 voters, ranking 13th among 18 of its democratic Group of 20 peers, according to the Economic Survey compiled by Modi’s top economic adviser. The report called for greater compliance through non-punitive means and urged that the effort to collect taxes doesn’t lead to harassment by officials.“In the past, revenue pressures on tax officials have led to increased scrutiny and investigations of tax payers,” Deloitte’s Mani said. “As the GST legislation is in its infancy and needs to be understood by all taxpayers, it is hoped that such actions would be kept in abeyance till the law settles down.” Bloomberg
Niti Aayog vice chairman Rajiv Kumar said if CAs do not extend cooperation, India will not be able to erase dualism in terms of organised and unorganised sectors, which is not good for the economy. Photo: Pradeep Gaur/MintBengaluru: The goods and services tax (GST) regime would get stabilised in the next 18 months, Niti Aayog vice chairman Rajiv Kumar said on Friday.“Give us time and you will see that in the next 18 months, GST will get stabilised, and this is where I think your (chartered accountants or CAs) role is critical,” he said while addressing the southern regional conference of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) in Bengaluru. “Unfortunately, some of you are trying to scare investors away from GST rather than helping them. I think it is rather unfair,” he added.Kumar said if CAs do not extend cooperation, India will not be able to erase dualism in terms of organised and unorganised sectors, which is not good for the economy. “Formalisation of the economy will give a fillip to tax compliance. At present, tax compliance is between 40 to 43%. It must increase to 90%. The role of CAs becomes that much important,” he said.Kumar said tax rates under GST will rationalise into three slabs, from five at present. “In times to come, tax rates under goods and services tax will converge into three slabs — 0, 12 and 28 per cent,” he said. Kumar said to expect one tax rate under GST was impractical, given the size of the country which is equal to all European nations from Moscow to London put together.“Also, there are varied cultures and business ethics followed by different states, and hence it is not feasible to have one tax rate under GST. Hence, it was necessary to have those multiple rates,” he said. Kumar said it will be a huge step forward if petroleum products are brought under GST, about which union finance minister Arun Jaitley had recently spoken in the Rajya Sabha.On demonetisation, he said the government may not have been able to convert all black money into white, but it has converted black money into grey. “Believe me, Rs4.5 lakh crore that has returned to banks by way of demonetisation will be acted upon,” he added.