India’s substantial jump of 30 places on the ease of doing business rankings comes on the back of a range of reforms undertaken by the Modi government since coming to power in 2014, says Richard Fenning, global CEO of Control Risks. Photo: Pradeep Gaur/MintNew Delhi: The Narendra Modi government faces the significant challenges of tepid economic recovery and slow pace of job creation in 2018, says Richard Fenning, global CEO of Control Risks, a risk consultancy that helps organizations manage political and security risks. In an interview, Fenning said the Modi government now needs to push for politically difficult land and labour reforms to further boost economic growth.Edited excerpts:What are the risks and opportunities that the Narendra Modi government is facing currently?The main risk to the Modi administration in 2018 is likely to be the slow pace of economic recovery and the challenges in creating enough new jobs in the run-up to the 2019 general elections. While the government’s announcement in October to inject $32 billion to recapitalize the banking sector will boost lending and consequently give a fillip to growth over the coming quarters, we expect job creation and up-skilling workers to continue being major challenges for the Modi government.As far as opportunities go, Control Risks sees no major challenge to political stability at the federal level with the Modi administration firmly ensconced in power. Coming on the back of the improvement in the World Bank ease of doing business rankings and the ratings upgrade by Moody’s, we at Control Risks think this is a great opportunity for the government to stay the course by continuing to simplify business procedures and pressing ahead with the wider reform agenda over the coming year.Has India’s 30-rank jump in the World Bank’s Doing Business report changed perceptions of global investors?India’s substantial jump of 30 places on the ease of doing business rankings comes on the back of a range of reforms undertaken by the Modi government since coming to power in 2014. These include fuel subsidy reforms, introducing a landmark Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, power sector reforms aimed at reducing the debt burden of state discoms and the implementation of GST (goods and services tax) earlier this year. While these rankings do absolutely help to create a positive mood around the India story, investors do tend to take a longer view of things, including assessing the investment climate at the ground level, where we continue to see significant variations between states in terms of the business environment.How would you rate the current government’s fight against corruption and black money? Would you say corruption has come down under the current administration compared to the previous one?We think the recent government initiatives, such as the partial digitalization of government licences and permits, are reducing bureaucratic red tape and avenues for corruption at the federal level. Moreover, efforts to reduce the role of cash in India as evidenced by demonetisation and channelling of subsidies through direct cash transfers signal a broader move towards expanding the role of the formal economy, which we believe is likely to help reduce corruption and black money in the longer term.We have not seen any large-scale corruption come to light in recent years and the government has been successful in carrying out a series of transparent auctions of telecom spectrum and coal blocks. However, India continues to rank 79 out of 179 countries and territories in Transparency International’s 2016 Corruption Perceptions Index, suggesting that corruption remains a major challenge, very often prevalent at most stages in the business cycle and particularly pronounced at the lower levels of the bureaucracy and government. So the glass there is very much half-full.How do you see the Make in India pitch by the Indian government? Do you see it taking wing?We have very much taken note of Prime Minister Modi’s Make in India pitch. However, for the government to fully realise its objectives in this regard, it will need to simplify onerous laws around land and labour. This would help to give the boost necessary for large-scale manufacturing to really take off.Now that GST has been implemented, what are the other reform measures that India should be focusing on?India should continue simplifying business procedures for foreign companies. Our clients still report critical delays in getting licences and renewals of key permits in India compared to other countries. Other reforms—and I do recognise that some of them are politically-contentious—include land and labour reforms, further reforming the subsidy regime such as for fertilisers and privatisation and restructuring of ailing SOEs (state-owned enterprises).How much of a risk is rising oil prices for the Indian economy?Considering that India imports almost 75% of its crude oil requirements, any rise in global oil prices will increase India’s oil import bill, which will in turn put pressure on both the country’s fiscal and current account deficits. There is also a risk that it might adversely affect India’s public finances as well as the rate of economic recovery more broadly over the coming year.What does the rise of China mean for India? Is China’s Belt and Road Initiative a potential threat for India or an opportunity?The rise of China is hardly a new trend and has been taking place for over a decade now, and this is likely to continue creating new opportunities and risks for other international partners, including India. A key challenge will be to ensure that China’s rise continues to be largely peaceful with China broadly conforming to a rules-based international order. India has already shown a lot of maturity and pragmatism in the way it has prioritized its economic relationship with China even as it seeks common ground over longstanding border disputes and other regional geopolitical issues and that is encouraging.China’s Belt and Road Initiative has the potential to significantly upgrade physical infrastructure and connectivity across the South and Central Asian regions, which historically have been less integrated than other sub-regions in the world. In the long term, this could be an opportunity for India as it would increase regional mutual inter-dependencies and economic opportunity by boosting regional supply chains and creating new markets for India.How do you view the new phrase “Indo-Pacific cooperation” coined by the US administration?It comes on the back of growing strategic convergence between the US and India in recent years and does signal a greater willingness on the part of the US to accord a more prominent role for India in the Asia-Pacific. This dives neatly into India’s own Act East policy which has seen India shore up relations across key countries in the region including Japan, South Korea, Singapore, Vietnam and Australia.
The September quarter did see companies report rather decent sales growth rates, which was the first quarter after GST came into effect from July. Photo: Ramesh Pathania/MintA 37% increase in the industry’s stock index may not seem the appropriate reaction to a year filled with challenges for the sector. But that’s how much the BSE FMCG Index has gained in the past year, despite the spillover effects of November 2016’s demonetisation, followed by the chaos wrought by the goods and services tax mid-year.That consumption was the dominant theme of 2017 with investment-linked sectors taking longer to recover could be one reason. That the long-term consumer market remains healthy and will bounce back could be another. Investors appear to have stayed invested or added consumer stocks to their portfolio, in the hope of a sustained revival. So, 2018 could be seen as a year in which these expectations will be tested.The developing signs are positive. The September quarter did see companies report rather decent sales growth rates, which was the first quarter after GST came into effect from July. Both urban and rural markets are recovering, although urban is doing better. If rural snaps into action, then growth rates in 2018 could swing up further.The agencies that track the sector seem optimistic. Euromonitor expects Asia Pacific to drive consumer market growth between 2017 and 2030, pointing to the fact that although it contributes to half of global manufacturing, it has only a 27% share in consumer expenditure. It expects China and India to remain key contributors.Nielsen Co. brought out a year-end note which talks about global FMCG markets strengthening. It is upbeat on India and says business is returning to normalcy and says the industry is encouraged by the government’s proactive moves to cut tax rates under GST. But that does not mean all companies will do equally well.A size-wise analysis by Nielsen of September quarter growth shows overall FMCG retail sales grew by 14.1% (this can differ from the sales companies report), with the top five companies reporting 12.6% growth while the next five actually did much better, reporting 18.4% growth. The next 20 saw slower growth but impressively, the smaller companies as a whole seem to have done very well. So, while demonetisation and GST may have affected the unorganized segment, the organized but small players may be doing well. Although this is only one quarter’s numbers, the trends indicate that the smaller companies may be doing well also.The December quarter should give the first signs of how the sector is doing, although this task will be made difficult by a low sales base due to demonetisation. Adjusted for that, a healthy revival in volume growth in both urban and rural areas is what we are looking for. On the macro front, if GDP growth revives, that should support a sustained revival. Rising inflation could become a problem and is a risk that bears watching. A little is good as it lets companies increase prices but too much will see consumers cut back on spending.Lastly, valuations are expensive. The FMCG Index trades at a price-to-earnings ratio of 42 times its trailing four quarter earnings, compared to the broad market’s 25 times. That’s a lot of expectation that has been front-loaded. That also means the risks are more to the downside if the listed universe is unable to deliver the kind of growth the market is expecting.
Upasana Taku, co-founder, MobiKwikThe government’s decision to bear the merchant discount rate (MDR) on digital payments of up to Rs2,000 will bring greater level of acceptability for digital payment systems. Digital payments will become a way of life both for consumers and merchants and bring a cultural shift in digital payments. The reduced payment of MDR by merchants will also increase transparency in digital transactions and bring about greater accountability.Samit Ghosh, MD and CEO Ujjivan Small Finance BankThe seven new small finance banks (SFBs) launched this year and the two in the previous year have embarked on a journey of financial inclusion of 600 million plus unserved and under-served customers. The new banks will go beyond traditional microfinance, entering the affordable housing and micro, small and medium enterprises space. In the coming years the SFBs will grow to be formidable mass-market players championing the cause of financial inclusion.Renu Satti, MD and CEO, Paytm Payments Bank2017 has been a remarkable year in our country for driving digital and financial inclusion. This year will also be remembered as one when Payments Banks were launched. We welcome 2018 and look forward to more innovation, new product launches and aggressive growth. India is currently at the center of the banking world, and is set to emerge as a benchmark in digital and financial inclusion.Shekhar Bhandari, senior EVP and business head – global transaction banking and precious metal, Kotak Mahindra Bank LtdGST, introduced in 2017, will create an ecosystem where the entire chain of value addition will be recorded and tracked. Financial institutions can use this data for better risk management and efficient working capital financing; providing significant benefits across businesses. With data being the new oil, GST facilitates its combustion to propel India’s growth engine. Prevention of tax avoidance and the increase in tax base is another positive of GST.