GST implementation required massive destocking of inventory in various sectors including packaged consumer goods and durables in the run-up to the roll out. Photo: Priyanka Parashar/MintNew Delhi: Packaged goods companies and makers of consumer durables have pinned their hopes on 2018 for a revival in demand as the market recovers from the initial hiccups that followed the implementation of the goods and services tax (GST), the country’s biggest indirect tax reform.Consumer-facing firms suffered through 2017 as the first half went in tackling the after-effects of demonetisation—the invalidation of high-value banknotes announced on 8 November 2016—which suddenly took 86% of the currency out of circulation, leaving cash-dependent Indians with little in hand to spend, besides choking wholesale trade. On 1 July 2017, GST was rolled out. Its implementation required massive destocking of inventory in various sectors including packaged consumer goods and durables in the run-up to the roll out.In the short term, both demonetisation and GST impacted wholesale trade because of issues related to execution, and led to massive destocking across trade channels, said Lalit Malik, chief financial officer, Dabur India Ltd. “While the urban markets, particularly modern trade and distributors, remained somewhat resilient to demonetisation and reported growth, rural demand—for lack of cash—was hit hard during the early part of 2017,” he added.Packaged goods makers, however, have started seeing “a revival in demand and consumption”, led by a rural market surge on the back of a good monsoon last year. “With market sentiment showing signs of improvement and stability returning post-GST, we expect the demand scenario to move up, both in rural and urban markets,” Malik said.While a spokesperson at Swiss packaged food company Nestle India Ltd said the company was confident about stronger growth in 2018, American beverage maker Coca-Cola India’s spokesperson said aerated beverages companies would have “preferred a lower rate”.However, the Coca-Cola India spokesperson said the company was focused on “managing business with the applicable tax, taking advantage of the efficiencies it will generate”.Consumer durables makers echoed the sentiment. “We went through some ups and downs, given the two major reforms of demonetisation and GST during the year. Both these reforms, while being in the right direction from a long-term perspective for the economy, did have some short-term impact on the economy and the industry,” said Sunil D’Souza, managing director, Whirlpool India Ltd. He added that the recent figures and trends indicate that the industry is again poised for “acceleration on the economic front” and remains “bullish about prospects”.Usha International chief executive Dinesh Chhabra said the company has started witnessing double digit growth across all product categories in the last two quarters. “Industry outlook is positive for 2018 and we expect that Usha will surpass the growth we had seen annually in the last three years,” he added.The government’s 15 December decision to raise import duty on a bunch of electronic products such as television sets, digital cameras, microwave ovens and mobile phones by 5-10 percentage points and the consequent increase in prices could have some impact on the consumer durables industry, especially on those companies and categories which depend heavily on imports and do not have production or assembling units in India. The industry is also pinning its hopes on more sops and government spending on infrastructure and development projects putting more cash in people’s hands, especially in the rural markets, which could potentially translate into consumer spending.Given that assembly elections in several states are due in 2018 and the general election the year after, there could be a host of incentives or populist steps by the government, which could spur revival in demand and consumption.
SMEs operating in sectors such as textiles, logistics and leather products, where the unorganized sector plays a key role and has key employers, were hurt the most. Photo: BloombergIt has been a turbulent calendar year for small and medium enterprises (SMEs). They spent the initial months coping with the after-effects of demonetisation, and as that pain was receding, the goods and services tax (GST) was implemented in July.Increased tax compliance led to a spike in their working capital requirements. This was a key challenge, especially for SME exporters, who had to first pay integrated GST, or IGST, and seek refunds after the goods were exported. Apart from that, technology glitches while filing GST returns on a monthly basis led to delayed tax refunds.SMEs operating in sectors such as textiles, logistics and leather products, where the unorganized sector plays a key role and has key employers, were hurt the most.It was only in October that the GST Council tweaked rules, allowing SMEs with an annual turnover of less than Rs1.5 crore to file GST returns on a quarterly basis. Also, the annual turnover limit under the composition scheme, which enables smaller firms to pay tax at a concessional rate, was raised from Rs75 lakh to Rs1.5 crore.Meanwhile, a slowdown in demand and temporary business disruption caused by a complicated GST compliance process weighed on credit ratings of SMEs.During April-November 2017, Care Ratings Ltd reviewed the ratings of 1,027 SMEs, upgrading 115 and downgrading 128 in this span of eight months.After demonetisation, during the six-month period from November 2016 to April 2017, the ratings agency had upgraded 165 SMEs and downgraded 185, out of the total rating reviews of 1,721 SMEs undertaken in that period.“The rating upgrade to downgrade ratio stands at 0.99 times, thereby reflecting higher number of downgrades as compared to upgrades. Similarly, the ratio of rating upgrade to downgrade was 0.99 times during FY17 (April 2016 to March 2017). Thus, up to November 2017, the upgrade-downgrade ratio has remained similar to that of FY17,” said Yogesh Shah, business head, Care Ratings Ltd.According to R. Vasudevan, business head at Crisil SME Ratings, “Majority of players (Crisil-rated SMEs) are expecting improved performance during the second half of fiscal 2018 compared to first half.”“Looking beyond the short-term implementation challenges, GST is expected to be more beneficial to SMEs which have sizable presence in small cities. Also, implementation of GST has led to increase in transparency in SMEs’ financial transactions. Such transaction trails will act as proxy to creditworthiness analysis matrices,” added Vasudevan.To conclude, while the aforementioned relaxations have been provided to SMEs, complete clarity on whether these measures have been beneficial or not shall emerge only after some time. This means the risk of credit downgrades cannot be completely ruled out for SMEs.Most stakeholders in the real estate sector stayed muted during 2017. Very few homebuyers made the buy decision and developers, on the whole, restrained from launching new projects.Though the real estate regulator came into existence this year, it has moved at snail’s pace in making its impact felt on the ground. The regulators’ website is recognised as one of the major tools that would bring transparency in the sector and help homebuyers immensely in their search for a house of their choice. While the Act has been promulgated, only the Maharashtra regulator has a fully functional website that the homebuyers can use.While affordable housing was in the news because of all the incentives that the government announced to promote it, this segment did not witness any appreciable rise in supply or increase of activity from the developers. And the way things have gone this year for the real estate sector, it does not seem that 2018 will be very different from 2017 in this regard.
What happened in 2017The year started on the back of many policy changes that happened in 2016. Some of these are: passing of Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Act, 2016, Real Estate (regulation and development) Act (RERA), 2016 and demonetization.All these policies had an impact on the real estate sector in 2017. “(It) was the year of policy disruptions, starting from demonetization to RERA and Goods and Services Tax (GST),” said Amit Oberoi, national director, knowledge systems, Colliers International India, a real estate services organization.Sales transactions were at a standstill in the early part of the year due to demonetization. This was followed by introduction of RERA, which is good for the market in the long run but in its immediate aftermath, the real estate developers ended up launching very few new projects as they were trying to come to terms with the new regulations, Oberoi added.Just as the realty sector was coming to terms with last year’s policy changes, the new tax regime of GST kicked in from 1 July 2017. This too had a dampening impact on real estate transactions.The new tax regime imposed 12% tax on all under-construction properties. Its impact on the cost of houses was seen to be higher than the taxes that were in force during the pre-GST regime.“The advent of GST has not helped the cause of reducing real estate prices. A flat 12% GST only increased the burden on buyers’ pockets. In the absence of clarity about GST calculations, developers have not been passing on any input credit to purchasers,” said Tejas Patil, head of real estate services, Sanctum Wealth Management Pvt. Ltd.RERA was designed to give buyers more security and the confidence to operate in the real estate market by making the developers and builders more accountable. Mandatory registration of under-construction and new projects with RERA and the application of GST on under-construction houses was a step in this direction. Many stakeholders believe that while this was a good step, its immediate impact was that the transactions almost dried out in new and under-construction projects.Though RERA is expected to improve homebuyer sentiment and confidence in the sector, this is not likely to happen in the near future. “Homebuyers are buoyed by the introduction of RERA. It now gives them a viable redressal platform, and their interests are well represented in terms of engagements between buyers and sellers. The onus is now on state governments to implement the regulations. It is not right to expect a turn-around in market sentiment based on a regulatory framework. The market sentiment will turn positive as we see improvement in the economy. The real estate demand is intrinsically linked to the economy,” said Oberoi.
What to expect in 2018Most developers will focus on completing their existing projects. New projects launches, especially in mid-level and luxury segment, are expected to remain subdued during 2018.The regulatory framework for real estate is no longer a matter of speculation. All developers now know what is expected of them and what the new rules of the game are. Developers who find it difficult to adhere to these regulatory requirements, or are facing financial problems because of low sales, may have to look at other solutions like consolidation of projects of their business. “Local companies, in the current fragmented market situation, will opt for consolidation with large developers,” said Patil.Agreed Oberoi: “In 2018, we will likely see takeover of projects stuck in insolvency proceedings.”However, consolidation could be the last attempt of businesses trying to restructure their functioning. There are several other options for developers, such as a deeper foray into affordable housing. Considering that the government has offered several incentives to the realty sector and the developers to promote affordable housing—along with the substantial pent-up demand for houses in this category—we may see more developers trying to profit from this opportunity.“It is a clear trend that is seen emerging with many developers announcing new launches in the low-income affordable housing segment. More developers will look to cash-in on the government support as well as the under-penetrated economically weaker sections of the society,” said Patil. Though most real estate experts are of the view that both demand and transactions are picking up, they do not expect any immediate rise in property prices. “For select projects in specific micro markets, and with respectable developers, prices are expected to be steady with an upward bias,” said Patil. Besides that, experts believe that demand will be driven by end users, and they do not see a return of investors in the sector. “Retail investors will still stay away from the sector till prices start climbing up and (one can) expect prices to remain subdued in the first half of the year,” said Oberoi.If you are planning to buy a property, consider completed projects. In many locations you can find properties even in completed projects. If you are still house-hunting, make a list of projects that are complete in your preferred locality. Shortlist a few based on your requirement such as amenities or quality of construction. If you have access to financing for buying a house, this is a good time to buy because in many completed projects, the developers are looking to get rid of their inventory. This could also be because, according to media reports, the government is planning to tax unsold apartments that are lying with developers for more than 1 year.WHAT WILL BE THE GST IF YOU BUY HOUSE18%: Goods and Services Tax (GST) rate on purchase of real estate (both residential and commercial)12%: The effective rate of GST that you will have to pay if you buy an under-construction property since only two-third of the property value is considered for GST; one third is considered cost of land