It’s less of a case of investing into beaten down sectors—our strategy is to put our money into stocks with earnings growth, says Jon Thorn.Indian markets are not expensive at current levels, says Jon Thorn, co-founder and director of India Capital Fund Ltd, adopting a stance contrarian to that of his peers among global fund managers.“Company earnings are at a trough and total market profits relative to nominal GDP (gross domestic product) is at the bottom of the historical range. With the recap of the public bank sector and the start of a recovery in the private capex cycle, there is massive potential for an acceleration of earnings growth and thus expansion of stock price multiples,” Thorn said in an interview.Edited excerpts:Your take on the Indian markets in 2018. Where do you forecast Sensex to be at December-end 2018? What is your 2018 target for Nifty?Index EPS (earnings per share) had been stubbornly flat or shrinking for most of the past couple of years, declining by 4.4% in the financial year ending this past March. Growth in the two quarters since then has now averaged 10.5%.That’s still a little low by Indian standards, but represents a nearly 15 percentage point gain even as the economy works through the lingering effects of demonetisation and the introduction of the new goods and services tax (GST). So we have a tangible sign that the favourable macro is flowing down to corporate level, and we expect India to do well in 2018 with the pick-up in index earnings driving stock prices.As a stock picker we have pricing targets for the stocks that we hold but no forecast for the Sensex and Nifty. Also our fund also has low overlap with the index, much lower than other foreign India funds.I can only say that we expect the index to be at a higher level in December 2018 than today’s level. Another supporting factor is that the shift from gold and real estate to financial savings in India today is driving strong domestic equity flows. In Jan 2014, mutual fund equity investments were around 2.6% of India’s market cap—today the figure has risen to close to 5% . Total mutual funds’ AUM (assets under management) increased 40% to reach a record $359 billion at the end of November.Are you finding markets expensive at current levels? Is it still a buy-on-dips market?There is a lot of comment that Indian stocks are expensive in terms of forward PE (price/earnings) ratios and the like. But we adopt a differentiated, fundamental research-driven strategy and if you look a bit deeper like we have, we come to the conclusion that India is not expensive. Company earnings are at a trough and total market profits relative to nominal GDP is at the bottom of the historical range.With the recap of the public bank sector and the start of a recovery in the private capex cycle, there is massive potential for an acceleration of earnings growth and thus expansion of stock price multiples. The India Capital Fund is a research driven long-term investor, and we buy when we see earnings growth potential at the right price rather than specifically focusing on dips in the market. We may, however, add to a position if we feel that the stock price of one of our positions is being unfairly punished for a transitory negative factor, and we are confident that profits will recover once the company overcomes the temporary negative factor.What are the sectoral trends we can see in 2018? Which are the sectors that you would prefer—is it still consumption on top, and what is your take on some of the beaten-down sectors that are now coming back into action?We like consumption-related themes given India’s GDP growth and growing working age population. Stocks which are a proxy for domestic consumption are banks, non-bank financials, autos and commercial and professional services. We don’t like consumer staples, or FMCG (fast-moving consumer goods). Or IT (information technology) or pharma. Those last two sectors will have their day again, but we are not sure that day is now.It’s less of a case of investing into beaten down sectors—our strategy is to put our money into stocks with earnings growth.Are you taking any bets in midcap IT or midcap pharma?We do not have any positions in midcap IT or pharma stocks.What are the sunrise themes you may look at?We are always looking at new opportunities but what is a very attractive macro opportunity does not necessarily translate into an attractive investment proposition. Some up and coming new themes are renewable energy and within that industry, solar power is a sector where the government has enabled tremendous growth in capacity, by way of legislation, investment incentives and supporting infrastructure. Another sunrise theme is the growing surge of personal fitness and in turn fitness centre operators.As crude is hovering around $60-65 a barrel, do you think this could be a big concern for the Indian economy? What are the biggest risks—apart from crude—for Indian markets in 2018?Rising oil prices would put pressure on inflation without a doubt. But the Saudis and Opec (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) want to keep oil prices at a steady level rather than increase rapidly. There is also a lot of excess production capacity which will come back on if oil prices start to climb steeply. So the oil price threat is manageable. The problem regarding crude is a spike closer to $100, but that’s a problem for everyone! Very few people see that as a serious likelihood, and so I think or hope we are safe.What can trigger a correction in Indian stock prices?This can be India-specific such as politics—in 2018, assembly elections are due in eight states—or it can be a global sell-off of emerging market stocks. GDP is so strong, though if there were to be a correction, it’s hard to see that starting a persistently lower market.What are your expectations on foreign portfolio flows into India next year?We expect foreign investor interest in the Indian market to be strong given the country’s favourable macro, continuity on reforms—although these will be on a much smaller scale than DeMo (demonetisation) and GST—and an expected pick-up in corporate earnings.But foreign portfolio flows are also, in many instances, dictated by what’s happening in other emerging and developed markets, as a part of risk-on or risk-off, so they can be volatile and unpredictable.There is a problem, if you like, for some foreign investors as they reacted to DeMo and GST by reducing their exposure to India, which, while understandable, was nevertheless wrong. Those foreign investors lost gains and they will have to reconsider their India reduction early in 2018. I would assume they will reverse them at some point.September quarter results have been mixed. How do you see earnings shaping up going ahead?GDP growth, and in turn corporate earnings, has been choked by the high NPLs (non-performing loans) in the public banking sector—public sector banks account for over 70% of the total bank sector assets—corporate leverage and elevated real lending rates.But the government’s decision in late October to implement a Rs2.11 trillion ($32 billion) recapitalization of the public banking sector is the game changer. In my view, the final impediment to longer and stronger GDP growth and corporate earnings is gone and the spark needed to re-ignite the long-dormant investment cycle, has now arrived. It’s been a long time coming. Near-term uncertainty is something to look through, and earnings growth should start to accelerate soon. This is not a cyclical or a fadeaway economic shot, but an old-school, long-term and structural change which starts to reposition the painful part of the Indian banking industry, and therefore economy. Therefore, I think it’s really important to understand where the market and many companies are in this cycle, which is a cycle of change, and quite a kick-start. The proof of the pudding is in the eating, as they say, and therefore we need to see that EPS (earnings per share growth) happens, but our assumption is that when it comes through it will be persistent.After having secured a very narrow victory in Gujarat, do you expect that a rural pivot from the government in terms of its policy focus going forward? If so, with rural India coming off a low base, and with policy support, what are the stocks that will benefit from rural and infra spending.In Gujarat, the BJP (Bharatiya Janata Party) won 99 seats in the 182-seat assembly, 16 seats less than the previous results in 2012. However, this result was not unexpected given DeMo and GST-related factors. We also have to remember that the BJP managed to take the state of Himachal Pradesh from Congress at the same time.The government has made a big push on infrastructure spending to make up for the slack in private capex. With the bank recap programme, private capex should start to pick up. Similarly, the government has provided the rural industry policy support and we expect that to intensify in the coming year.The fund is invested in the beneficiaries of rural and infra spending such as cement stocks. I would also like to add that although Mr Modi (Prime Minister Narendra Modi) is determined to get reelected in 2019, the government’s major initiatives such as the ‘Housing for All’ programme have not been populist measures. The looming Gujarat state election did not deter the government from implementing GST. So this government has refrained to a large extent from wasteful populist measures as a way of buying votes. I think May 2019 is something that should be in everyone’s mind as a target—if Modi keeps a strong majority in that next general election, one can assume the market will rise.
While there are signs of positive momentum starting to build in the October-December quarter, how that progresses and whether it will make up for lost ground remains to be seen. Photo: Pradeep Gaur/MintBengaluru: India’s alcoholic beverages industry has had nothing short of a challenging 2017 in terms of volume growth, especially during the first three quarters of the year. A strong rebound in 2018 would be the ideal balm.But the industry is only cautiously optimistic as it heads into the new year, with uncertainties around the impact of route-to-market changes in a few states and elections in others. As a result, most major alcobev companies plan to further sharpen their focus on the premium part of their portfolio as they chase value rather than volume growth.Overall sales volumes—a key measure of performance—saw a small decline of 1-3% in 2017, according to industry estimates. While there are signs of positive momentum starting to build in the October-December quarter, how that progresses and whether it will make up for lost ground remains to be seen.“As we enter 2018 I feel some of the ‘black swan’ events of 2017 are behind us. But we expect big distribution structure changes in 2018 and how these impact industry value growth is an unknown right now,” said Anand Kripalu, managing director at India’s largest liquor company United Spirits Ltd (USL).The year 2017 was riddled with policy changes that put volumes under the pump at alcobev companies. Those changes included demonetisation, the Supreme Court’s highway liquor sales ban and the implementation of the goods and services tax (GST) that pushed up input costs.Consequently, volume growth at many companies was flat until September, i.e. the second quarter of financial year 2017-18. Market leader USL’s volumes declined 17.19% in the six months to September, compared with the year-ago period according to its latest quarterly filing, as it continued to focus on value instead.French liquor giant Pernod Ricard SA, India’s second largest spirits company, does not report volume growth but overall India sales growth was a marginal 1% in 2016-17. It follows a July to June financial calendar. Pernod’s India sales in the July-September quarter grew 2%.Kingfisher beer maker United Breweries Ltd (UBL) reported volume growth of 11% during the July-September quarter. But beer companies have had a tougher October-December quarter than other alcobev firms because of a steep excise duty hike in Maharashtra, a top market for beer consumption.“Effectively for over two months, from 23 October until now (19 December), we’ve had practically no sales and zero production in the state of Maharashtra and it is a very, very important market for us. We are in discussions with the government to find a middle road and we’re hopeful about finding a solution,” said Shekhar Ramamurthy, managing director of UBL.Officer’s Choice whisky maker Allied Blenders & Distillers Pvt. Ltd’s (ABD) volumes were flat for 2017 while that at single-malt whisky maker Amrut Distilleries Pvt. Ltd grew 3% for the same period.Despite policy changes, volume growth at a few companies—particularly those that mostly operate in the premium space and with smaller bases to grow from—grew at a healthy pace. For instance, rum maker Bacardi & Co. said it witnessed a healthy double-digit growth rate in 2017. John Distilleries Pvt. Ltd’s chairman Paul P. John said the company had a good year in 2017 and expects the same momentum to continue in 2018, but did not disclose numbers.“From 2018 onwards we are concentrating more on our premium portfolio and we expect that to grow about 12% while the regular range will grow about 5-7%,” said Abhishek Khaitan, managing director of India’s third-largest spirits company Radico Khaitan Ltd. His views are echoed by several others including Amrut’s executive director Rakshit Jagdale, winemaker Sula Vineyards Pvt. Ltd’s marketing head Kenneth Pritchard and Bacardi India’s managing director Vijay Subramaniam.But according to research firm Euromonitor International, in value terms the spirits industry is expected to grow only by 2.9% on a compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) basis between 2016 and 2021. That compares with a 6.6% CAGR in terms of value growth between 2011 and 2016. It is also slower than overall volume growth, which is estimated at 4.2% between 2016 and 2021.And additional policy obstacles could be in store. Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh could possibly change the way they distribute alcohol and give governments more control over the process. This could pose a challenge for organised liquor firms as sometimes those managing state-run alcohol outlets are lowly-paid employees, and that could lead to issues of graft, according to industry executives.A few states are also headed for election, including Rajasthan, Chattisgarh and Karnataka. “Fears will always remain whenever there are elections,” said ABD’s chairman Deepak Roy, citing the example of the Panvel Municipal Corporation (PMC) in Maharashtra that called for a ban on the sale of alcohol in the municipality last week.But Edelweiss Securities’ senior vice-president Abneesh Roy had a different take on elections. He expects an election year to be good for liquor consumption as political parties dole out a whole lot of incentives and policies, for instance farm loan waivers, which in turn push up all consumption in general.Indeed, despite the fears, ABD’s Roy expects volume growth to bounce back to 12-13% at ABD next year. Radico’s Khaitan expects 7-8% overall volume growth at his company next year and Amrut’s Jagdale is targeting 5-7%.“The fundamentals of the Indian market are very strong and favourable for the alcobev market even though the robust demand side was constantly kept in check by the tough operating environment in 2017. India offers one of the largest growth potential in spirits consumption amongst all markets,” a spokesperson for Pernod Ricard said in an emailed response.
Higher crude prices will not only mean an increase in subsidies on liquified petroleum gas (LPG) and kerosene but will also bring higher government revenue. Graphic: MintGlobal crude oil prices had started falling since mid-2014. It’s well known that the Indian government chose not to pass on the decline in crude prices to consumers in the form of lower retail prices of petrol and diesel. Instead, it raised excise duties over a period of time and used the windfall to improve its finances.However, with crude prices on a firm footing now, could they pose a fiscal threat?Higher crude prices will mean increase in subsidies on liquified petroleum gas (LPG) and kerosene. However, higher oil prices bring higher government revenue, too, analysts from Jefferies India Pvt. Ltd noted in a report on 13 December. Excise collections from petrol/ diesel do not rise but custom duties, goods and services tax, royalties, cess and profit share do, as do upstream state-owned enterprises’ earnings that bring higher corporate taxes, dividends and dividend taxes, elaborated the brokerage. Indeed, these offset ~90% of the impact of higher subsidies, leaving the budget largely agnostic to changes in oil prices, unlike in the past, said Jefferies.For now, government’s finances aren’t looking particularly rosy, considering the uncertainty over how goods and services tax (GST) revenues will pan out, lower dividends from the Reserve Bank of India and lacklustre direct tax collections. Madan Sabnavis, chief economist at CARE Ratings, says, “In the light of higher borrowings announced yesterday, it looks like fiscal deficit will be higher.” The issue is that high crude price will pressurize fiscal balance on the revenue side, added Sabnavis.The higher-than-expected borrowing shock of Rs50,000 crore will mean that the fiscal deficit for the year 2018 as a percentage of gross domestic product, or GDP, is now likely to slip ~50 basis points to 3.7%, according to Kotak Institutional Equities. One basis point is 0.01 percentage point.But what if crude prices were to rise further hereon? Will the government take another excise duty cut on petrol and diesel then? “A Rs2 excise duty cut on petrol and diesel will mean a revenue hit of Rs25,000 crore a year. We all need to consider that the public expenditure may also increase in the run up to the elections,” says Ritesh Gupta, an analyst at Ambit Capital Pvt. Ltd. That’s when the discomfort will begin, unless, of course, revenues from GST surprise positively in a big way.
The 10-year bond yield ended at 7.326%, compared to its previous close of 7.396%. Photo: MintMumbai: The yield on government bonds fell in the last trading session of 2017 after the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) cancelled part of the scheduled bond auction, bringing some relief to banks, which feared higher losses in their bond portfolios.he 10-year bond yield ended at 7.326%, down 7 basis points from its previous close of 7.396%. Bond prices have fallen more than 80 basis points this year, making it the worst year since 2009.Bond prices and yields move in opposite directions.Of the total Rs15,000 crore in bonds up for auction, RBI sold only Rs4,000 crore worth. According to the auction results, RBI did not accept bids for bonds due in 2022 and 2031. Against a total of Rs11,000 crore worth bonds on sale in two categories, RBI received bids worth over Rs25,985 crore.The reason for the rejection of bids was not clear.The fall in yields on Friday, also the last trading session of the quarter, will help banks by reducing the provisioning required to cover losses on their bond portfolio.Banks have to revalue their bond portfolio at the end of every quarter. In case the value of the securities is lower than the market rate, they are mandated to keep aside funds as mark-to-market provisioning.“There will still be mark-to-market provisioning because yields have risen sharply. But with today’s fall, the total provisioning requirement by banks is expected to come down by around 50 basis points (in price terms),” said Ajay Manglunia, executive vice-president and head of fixed income at Edelweiss Financial Services.The decision to cancel part of the bond auction came after the bond yield surged to a 17-month high on Thursday due to additional borrowings the government announced.The government announced the additional borrowing plan on Wednesday after the goods and services tax (GST) data for December showed a slide in revenue receipts. The expanded market borrowing programme, analysts said, signals the government may breach its fiscal deficit target of 3.2% of gross domestic product.The government breached its fiscal deficit target for the current fiscal year ending March 2018 in November, data released by the Controller General of Accounts (CGA) on Friday showed. During the April to November period, the government’s fiscal deficit was 112% of its Rs5.5 trillion target for fiscal year 2017-18, according to the data. Traders are already concerned by a surge in crude prices, which may lead to higher inflation and give RBI less room to cut rates. Meanwhile, the rupee closed at a nearly four-month high against the US dollar, tracking gains in the local equity markets.
James Munson, managing director of Marks & Spencer Reliance India Ltd. Photo: Ramesh Pathania/MintNew Delhi:James Munson, who took over as managing director of Marks and Spencer Reliance India Pvt. Ltd in May, has come back to the country after nearly four years and is quick to notice changes in fashion trends. In 2011, when he was the marketing head in India, the company struggled to sell women’s shorts. Now there’s a surge in demand and Munson is all set to take the British retailer’s business to the next level with low-priced products and new stores in India.Marks and Spencer Group Plc. (M&S), which has a joint venture with Reliance Retail Ltd, has the highest number of stores in India—62—outside of the UK. The retailer also sells the M&S brand across three online marketplaces—Myntra, AJIO and Amazon.Thirty-nine-year-old Munson has been working with M&S since 2006 in different roles and has over 20 years of experience in the retail industry, including six in India and the Czech region.In an interview, he spoke about the new store formats and growth strategy. Edited excerpts:How has the Indian market changed since your earlier stint here?India is coming in line with international fashion trends. When I started in 2011, ladies’ shorts was an area where we really struggled but now, we are getting a lot of traction there. So, there is an alignment of fashion. There is no doubt that in India, there is a greater demand for colour and print. We make sure with our local sourcing that we get additional colour and print into our stores here.From a business perspective, India is increasingly becoming a competitive market, which is good for us as well as the consumers. The malls have professionalized in terms of investments. However, there are some things that still haven’t changed...getting a quality real estate is still very difficult.From a business perspective, India is increasingly becoming a competitive market, which is good for us as well as the consumers- James Munson, MD of Marks and Spencer Reliance IndiaHow and what did India shop for in 2017?We see Indian customers increasingly follow global trends. For example, we’ve recorded a 62% increase in the sale of dresses since last year as well as a 25% increase in swimwear sales during 2017. Customers have brought into trends and key pieces such as the statement sleeves, embroidered detailing and patches across dresses.Has there been a change in M&S prices recently?It will be wrong to say that there has been a fundamental shift in our prices, but we are focusing on getting our opening price points right to give the customer value for money. We are pushing these value credentials in segments where we have real authority, like lingerie. Bras are growing at a rate of 31% year-on-year and this year, we introduced a starting range of bras at Rs799, which was Rs1,299 last year. We have sold 86,000 units of that range so far this year.We introduced a range of Rs999 (earlier Rs1,299) in men’s polo t-shirts, which is starting to get traction. We have also introduced a ladies dresses line at Rs1,999, which has done phenomenally well. There is exponential growth in dresses.What led to this marginal shift in prices?It’s a combination of reviewing as to where we sit in the market, our ability to make sure that we have a very strong local sourcing base and that we are able to drive real value to our customers. Today, about 65% of what we source for our business comes from India, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh; 30% of our sourcing is directly from India itself.This gives us the benefit on supply chain and allows us to pass that benefit onto the customers. But it’s not just about prices. It’s a combination of making sure that we are offering regular fashion in our stores at a price point that is compelling.We are focusing on getting our opening price points right to give the customer value for money- James Munson, MD, Marks and Spencer Reliance IndiaHas M&S reduced store sizes in India?Over the years, we have gone through variations in our store sizes and now, we are clear as to what the right size should be. Our latest store is 12,500 sq. ft (in Mumbai) and it seems like a sensible size for tier-I locations.Again, there is no fundamental shift but we have rationalized a few stores (two or three out of 62) to align these with the markets where we operate in. In the new markets, store sizes will depend on the availability of real estate. We have significant learnings from our current stores and we know what store size works where.How big is your winter collection, given that the season is down to just two months?In the north, winter wear accounts for 40% of our overall turnover. It’s an area where we have some real differentiators against our competitors. So far, there has been no significant shift in the trend with climate change. It’s colder this year, which is playing into our strengths.You had introduced a separate lingerie and beauty store format. How has that worked out for the brand?For us, it is not a way to enter markets but to support our full-line stores. We have six independent beauty and lingerie stores and these are performing well. It’s all about making sure that we have the right location. Lingerie is a key opportunity as we move forward. We launched this format because lingerie is our strength and these stores help us get to a wider audience. With this format, we are able to make lingerie more accessible for the consumers.How quickly is India growing?Our growth rates have been strong. Last year, we delivered 10% like-for-like growth. We are having a strong year despite the impact of GST (goods and services tax). Last year, we did Rs880 crore (2016-17) and we recorded 16% overall growth. India continues to be a strategic and important market for M&S. We are cutting a decent path for us through the market.Which are your strongest markets?Delhi and Mumbai are clearly our biggest contributors. We have 24 stores in tier-II cities, which contribute a fifth of our revenue, but their rate of growth is much stronger than the business average. The bigger markets are high business contributors but growth rates are stronger in tier-II.What are the expansion plans for India?One thing that I have learned so far is that it is very difficult to define targets in India because there are a number of factors that play in the probability of delivering those targets. For example, store number is clearly defined by the probability to attract quality space. We are committed to grow the business here and concentrating on store expansion. We did eight stores this year and we want to continue at the same pace, if not higher.What kind of shopping trends are you looking at for 2018?For 2018, we’re continuing to follow global trends with contemporary design and fashionable styling. This includes must-haves from wrap dresses to shirt dresses with detailed finishings and botanical print styles. We’re also continuing to offer customers colourful linen they love in fashionable styles with bardot and kimono shapes through to everyday shorts that can be dressed up or down.Who is an average M&S consumer?Our average customer is around early 30 years of age or mid-thirties, female, often working, well-travelled and internationally aware.Where do you shop?I wear Marks and Spencer a lot, both formal and casual; I also shop for a number of different brands but I am not loyal to any brand, except M&S.What is your personal style?I am formal most of the week and over the weekend, I am just like everybody else.