Talking to ET Now , Head - Equities,, says It is better to play the corporate banks story rather than the leveraged plays and that one has to be very stock specific in pharma and consumer theme.Edited excerpts:In the emerging market , money is moving out from India to other destinations because the valuations are more attractive in other emerging markets as compared to India. Last time when I had come on your channel, I had said that earnings have to catch up.If earnings do not catch up, ultimately it will become difficult for the market to move on beyond a point. Sheer liquidity driving the market for last three to four months and that too only the domestic liquidity will not go well if earnings do not catch up.As you see, because of the GST and because of various massive research happening in the economy, Q2 will be more truncated. We will not have overall good numbers across the sectors, across the companies and again you go into December where you will have again base which is low so the numbers will look good but then it is not a real indicator of how things are moving out.Also, some macro factors are slightly against us for the time being -- be it oil or rupee depreciation or GDP slowdown. All this have been taken negatively by the FIIs and they have been continuous sellers in the market for last three months. They have more options to go into other emerging markets than India.Not really since we are bottom up stock pickers. We are very careful whenever we buy stock in our portfolio and wherever we see growth, we would like to hold on to those stories. In the portfolio which we have built, we are pretty happy with the way growth momentums are there. As of now, there is no major churn. We have been underweight on technology and pharma for some time and last time on your channel, we said we will be nibbling around if we feel that there is some growth momentum opportunities coming back in those sectors.It is good from the consumer point of view, because even at $54, you have the prices which are similar to what the prices were around $100 and I think most of the channels have been highlighting that. Obviously we have to bring some relief at the ground level especially when there is some kind of slowness in the economy. To that extent, it is good but whether it is a big relief we will have to wait and see.You have interesting companies getting listed. They are large companies, very good run companies, good corporate governances. Obviously, we would be looking into some of the stories to play.There has been some improvement. Few of the companies have been able to get through USFDA clearance and now the recent news of getting approval, it is a big approval, complex generic, a big approval; It is a very stock specific move, you have to be very-very cagey about what you are buying into pharma. Different companies have different set of problems and different set of business models to run and so if you really want to play that game, it is very stock specific, rather than going all out into all the pharma stocks Again, as I said, all numbers will not be great, some of the companies would be in low single digit growth rates while some might give those 10-15% kind of growth. We will have to see how numbers come by. However, channel checks suggest that there has been good restocking in some of the sectors in the consumer staples space and that is where we are seeing even from the media or from the newspapers the traction has been good.Again you have to be careful on the stock specific side on the consumer side because as I said still that economy is not full throttle in terms of giving you growth rates across the sectors and the subsectors of the domestic economy.That is what we expect. The next two, three months are critical, volatility will continue and by November you will really see how the GST implementation has gone by. It is one of the biggest reforms, a massive reset, you need smooth transition, it is like ease of doing business so really you want to see GST getting through smoothly and at faster rate. However, if GST implementation takes a back seat or maybe if there are more glitches in the system and people are not able to tally their tax credits. then there might be some kind of a chaos and a three to six month kind of a problem among the businesses on how to tackle this issue.That could be one of the big triggers if GST implementation is done smoothly and at a faster pace. The second best trigger would be the Gujarat election which will decide the fate of the popularity of the government and so really if that comes through then there should not be an issue so you are moving into three state elections Gujarat, Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh in next calendar year and then you go into national elections in 2019.You have a lot of news flows, lot of volatility to stay here and so it will be very difficult for the market to move on from here on if a few of the factors which I just alluded does not come by. We will have to see how it goes.It is better to play the corporate banks story rather than playing those leveraged plays because there are different sets of problems across the companies. We will have to see how this IBC code really gets implemented, how the NCLT auctions goes by, who is the new buyer to the defunct company, whether it is the same promoter who is able to buy them at 50-60% haircut or there are new good players coming into the system.So the jury is out, we do not know-- let us see one or two cases, the big cases how they go by and that will really decide the fate of this entire leverage companies. And I think it is better to play corporate banks than playing those individual companies.The implementation of GST had an adverse impact on manufacturing and may delay investment revival, the Reserve Bank said today while hoping that there will be simplification of the new indirect tax regime to the ease business process.In its fourth bi-monthly monetary policy review of 2017- 18, RBI forecast economic growth to slow to 6.7 per cent in the current fiscal, from 7.3 per cent projected earlier.It said that the "teething problems" linked to the Goods and Services Tax (GST) and bandwidth constraints may get resolved "relatively soon", allowing growth to accelerate in the second half."The implementation of the GST so far also appears to have had an adverse impact, rendering prospects for the manufacturing sector uncertain in the short term. This may further delay the revival of investment activity, which is already hampered by stressed balance sheets of banks and corporates," RBI said.Industrial production grew a meagre 1.2 per cent in July from 4.5 per cent a year ago, as manufacturing sector, especially capital goods, put up a dismal performance.Growth of the manufacturing sector, which makes up 77.6 per cent of the industrial production measuring index, decelerated sharply to 0.1 per cent in July compared to 5.3 per cent in the same period of 2016.Rolled out from July 1, GST has unified over a dozen local taxes including excise, service tax and VAT, and has transformed India into a single market for seamless flow of goods and services.The government has collected nearly Rs 1.9 lakh crore as GST in the first two months of roll out. However, small businesses and exporters have been complaining against the stricter compliance requirements.Under GST every registered business will have to file monthly returns online. Those businesses opting for composition scheme has the option to file quarterly returns.The Reserve Bank also recommended that among other things the government should enhance ease of doing business , including by further simplification of the GST, in order to support growth and achieve a faster closure of the output gap.
