Industry body SMERA (a joint initiative of SIDBI, D&B and leading public and private sector banks in India) has welcomed the relief measures announced by the GST Council on October 6. The announcements, believes SMERA, will go a long way in providing relief to a large number of micro small and medium ( MSME ) enterprises.The measures announced by the council, feels SMERA, will help in simplifying tax structure and minimisation of compliance costs for small businesses, evolution of an alternative GST mechanism for exports to ensure that SME exporters don't face liquidity or working capital pressures , and last but not the least, the revision of tax rates for some unbranded common products will help in improving the competitiveness of those MSMEs who manufacture and distribute them.In a recent survey conducted by SMERA, more than 60% of respondents felt that their systems were not ready for the new tax regime. The sector has been under pressure over the last few quarters with low capital availability and demand. The credit offtake to the MSME sector at scheduled commercial banks, as on August 2017, has been below the level as in the previous year. The general business confidence levels have not been encouraging and the lack of hiring plans reported by a majority of the MSMEs that SMERA surveyed, reflected this weakness.A key announcement by the GST Council on October 6 has been a simplification of the GST structure for micro-enterprises with gross turnover upto Rs 150 lakh. The composite scheme for small businesses which was applicable for turnover upto Rs 75 lakh has now been extended for gross turnover upto Rs 100 lakh. The composite scheme is the simplest of the GST scheme where the business entity pays a flat rate of tax ranging between 1-5%, without having to deal with any complex tax filing process. Further, businesses with turnover upto Rs 150 lakh have now been allowed to file returns and pay GST on a quarterly basis instead on a monthly basis."This implies that the compliance burden and its costs for small entrepreneurs and enterprises would reduce significantly. Such a simplification of the taxation structure for small businesses will also lead to an increase in the taxpayers' base and improve compliance," said SMERA Ratings , CEO, Sankar Chakraborti in a statement.Appreciating rupee has had a negative impact on Indian exporters. Exporters, particularly those in the MSME segment have been further impacted in the first phase of GST implementation with the delay in the refund of the upfront GST being paid by them; the original mechanism was already leading to a blockage of working capital and affecting the liquidity position of small and medium exporters. Nearly 46% of our survey respondents had believed that their working capital requirements will actually go up post GST implementation.This issue has been addressed by putting the exporters under an exempted category (where only a nominal GST of 0.1% will be applicable for the rest of the fiscal year) and proposing an e-wallet facility from next year. Additionally, the government has also assured that GST already paid by the exporters for the month of July and August will be duly refunded by the third week of October. In our opinion, such a step was necessary and has been taken in a timely manner to improve sustainability of India's small exporters. A SMERA study indicates that the share of SMEs in India's exports have steadily climbed from 40% in FY14 to around 50% in FY17 and is expected to climb further in the presence of an enabling environment."The introduction of GST will actually expand the market reach of MSMEs due to dismantling of inter-state barriers of trade. Specific measures now announced for the MSMEs will bring much needed relief to them as they were facing challenges post-introduction of GST. The long-term positive effects of GST will outweigh the current problems. The steps announced by the government shows its resolve to remove the pain points and make the transition to GST smooth," said SIDBI, CMD, Mohammad Mustafa in a statement.Another significant decision taken by the GST Council has been the reduction of the GST rate on 27 common products which are mostly unbranded and manufactured by MSMEs. The reduction in almost all the cases has been from the higher to the immediately lower tax slab (whether from 12% to 5% or 18% to 12%) and involves indigenously processed foods, man-made textile yarn, stationery and other job-work items. SMERA believes that such a realignment of the tax rates will improve the competitiveness of the unbranded products from the unorganised sector, which continues to be a major source of employment in our country. A noteworthy item in the reduction list is government contract job which involves high component of labour, GST rates therein having been lowered from 12% to 5%. This in a way indicates the focus on encouraging those businesses which can employ a larger number of people.
BENGALURU |CHENNAI | HYDERABAD: The Congress ministers in Karnataka would be privately cursing the GST for the unexpected fund crunch they are facing when they are barely six months away from the Assembly polls.They are pushing for the launch of new welfare programmes and strengthen successful ones and take up road work before the end of the calendar year but the GST compensation as well as the Centre's release schedule of the state's share of central taxes have upset their calculations. The Centre is required to compensate states for any revenue loss they suffer due to switch to the GST regime. The states' share in the central taxes would also go down when CGST collections drop due to the recent spate of changes in GST rates , an official said.“We have been told not to ask for additional funds for welfare schemes. The finance department is facing difficulty even to meet whatever has been promised and budgeted,“ said the secretary of a department. Karnataka CM Siddaramaiah has been launching big-ticket populist schemes and some infrastructure projects too.Since he also holds finance portfolio, he is aware of the tight financial situation. “We can see the finance department struggling to scramble for funds where it cannot say no,“ said an official.“We have been informally warned of a budget cut this year,“ the official said.Krishna Byre Gowda, the minister who represents Karnataka on GST Council, said the state has just received Rs 1,189 crore of compensation for July-August. In a recent interview with ET, he said the Council's decision to release the compensation once in two months has put many states under tremendous pressure.In Tamil Nadu , determining Integrated GST (IGST) is leading to tax flow disruptions. The IGST for August had turned up in the first week of September. Tamil Nadu, an official said, would be managing with existing funds and channel the GST funds as they arrive for welfare schemes. “As of now, there is no crisis, but there is disruption and delay.“States have been assured of 14% guaranteed compensation for five years under the GST regime. A top official with the TN finance department confirmed with ET that the state has not received compensation of the past two months. Telangana fears that continued fall in revenue collections could adversely impact its flagship programmes.The GST Council on Friday agreed partially to the demands of the Telangana government and further slashed the GST slab on the ongoing public works to 5% from the earlier agreed 12%, enabling the Southern state to obtain a further relief of around Rs 8,500 crore in a year, said an official. The ongoing public works include irrigation, potable water and tank desilting projects, he said. Further, he said the state government hopes that other states will also realise the significance and benefits of the demand being pursued by Telangana in the upcoming meetings of GST Council to insist on bringing down the GST slab to zero level on the ongoing public works taken up in pre-GST regime.What about the EPC activity? With IRB, we always tend to focus on toll and traffics but you also have a sizable EPC division. Most the EPC players in last couple of years have moved from BoT to hybrid annuity. You are the only large company which has decided to pursue BoT and toll road projects. What is the future of your EPC business?Firstly I tend to disagree with what you are saying that we are the only company not going into hybrid. There are several others who have so far not got into the hybrid annuity space because of it being intensively competitive and not really value accretive. But leaving that argument aside, we have stayed up aside from bidding into the hybrid annuity projects. But the competition is waning and with a lot of projects being picked up, the competitive intensity is also slowly coming down. Going forward we are not going to shy away from bidding on those depending on the value that it is able to generate. We will be bidding on the hybrid annuity as well.Your tariff rates, toll rates are linked to inflation. If inflation goes up by about 1%, what will be the change in your total tariff collections?I will come to that. Before that, I missed out on your EPC thing and so the EPC book also is doing well. There is almost Rs 8500-9000 crore of EPC order book backlog and that gives the EPC wing a very good visibility for the next couple of years. As regards tariff, the tenders these days have a two-leg tariff approach, where there is a fixed 3% tariff increase every year. There is also a 40% correlation to WPI. So, all the projects now in the IRB portfolio have this two- legged tariff approach. If you say that the inflation is going to be at say 4%, then 40% of that would be around 1.6% plus 3% fixed. The tariff revisions would tend to go in the region of around 4.6%.I want to understand some specific land parcels which you own along the Mumbai- Pune highway. What are your tentative plan for these parcels?The real estate sector is still grappling with the RERA and all other reforms. So, we have not strategized any monetisation of those assets yet.There has also been an additional proposal to develop the green field airport in Sindhudurg. Is that at least on track if not the land parcels along the Mumbai-Pune highway?Sindhudurg Airport is a Rs 300-crore size project which is less than a percent of the total asset book of IRB and that project is very much on track and the airport development is going on in full swing. It should be ready by middle of the next year.You are also the first company to have successfully launched and listed an InvIT. What is the debt that you have on your books and what is the plan to reduce it going further?InvIT has certainly been a game changer for IRB and for its debt profile. Post InvIT, the net debt to equity for IRB has come down from almost 2.8:1 to 1.7:1 now and going forward, we would be very careful on how the debt profile emerges because we have a platform where we can keep getting the equity invested back by selling the projects into InvIT. On a long-term basis. we do not see the net debt to equity going beyond 2.5:1.
