NEW DELHI: Car sales did not fire up on Dhanteras as pre-festive buying on fears of price hikes after implementation of GST took the sheen off the usual festival fervour. Consumer durables and electronics makers, however, saw healthy buying on the back of new products and attractive offers that were sweetened by easier financing schemes.While footfalls were not missing at retail points, sales conversion was not as brisk “as is the usual”, car retailers said. Top companies such as Maruti Suzuki and Hyundai, while witnessing the ‘Dhanteras rush’, could manage only flat volumes when compared to the same day last year.“Numbers have been similar at last year’s level,” said a spokesperson for Maruti Suzuki. The company sold (retail sales) around 30,000 cars on Dhanteras in 2016. Toyota also said sales on Dhanteras have been “more or less like last year”, and added that things could be “difficult” for the industry in November. “The next month can be lower. The sentiment is yet to get positive,” said N Raja, sales and marketing director at Toyota Kirloskar Motors.However, the situation has been tough for the luxury industry. People advanced luxury vehicles’ purchase on fears of a duty hike in GST. And once that did happen, prices of sedans and larger SUVs moved up. Also, implementation of GST has impacted the business of a large number of small traders — many of them potential customers who are grappling with tax issues, and are not purchasing luxury cars. “We are down by 25-30% this festive period,” said a leading dealer of Mercedes-Benz in the Delhi-NCR region. “A large part of buying already happened around August and September. The customer is not in any urgent need to purchase now.”A top BMW dealer in Mumbai echoed similar views. “There is momentum, but definitely a lot of purchases have been pulled forward due to GST. It may not be as good as last year... the festivities of last year is missing, and it is quieter this time around,” the dealer said.While footfalls were there at malls, buyers have been cautious, said Dinaz Madhukar, senior VP at DLF Luxury Retail & Hospitality. “With implementation of GST, we did notice a slight dip in sales initially, but it has regained normalcy. The only difference that we have noticed this festive season is that people are spending cautiously. They haven’t tightened their purse strings but they aren’t spending it mindlessly as is the case during Dhanteras and Diwali.”Rahul Gupta, MD of PP Jewellers and Diamonds, also spoke about pressure on Dhanteras sales. “Business may be down by 15-20%. Disposable income levels are not very comfortable and some of the measures such as demonetisation impacted business. However, the government’s move to increase cash transaction limit from Rs 50,000 to Rs 2 lakh has been a welcome measure.”But the scenario is rosier in the consumer electronics and durables segments. Dhanteras sales have been up nearly 20-25%, said Satish Padmanabhan, sales head at Sony India. “We launched new products and attractive gift offers. Financing schemes have been easy and have aided purchases of Bravia range of televisions.”Durables showrooms are open till midnight and Padmanabhan said showrooms have hired extra staff to deliver products and install them. Samsung India, the country’s biggest consumer durables company, said sales were up 30% over previous Dhanteras. “Business recorded its best-ever sales in the premium segment,” a company spokesperson said.
