While the long-term growth story remains intact, continued selling by FIIs, low earnings growth and slowdown in domestic flows could weigh down on markets in the short-term, Manish Kumar tells ET Wealth Various factors determine market levels. Institutional flows, quantum of issuances, valuations and earnings play a part. FIIs have been selling for some time but domestic inflows have been strong. Also, the market has seen large issues and this is expected to continue.So valuations are on the higher side. However, the earnings growth is expected to be moderate, though better than the previous quarter. All these factors lead us to believe that the market will move sideways.The long-term growth story remains intact. However, continued selling by FIIs, lower than expected earnings growth and potential slowdown in domestic flows could weigh down on the markets in the short-term.The implementation of GST has been a game changer for the Indian economy. It was a given that the implementation would cause some disruption, as businesses would need to realign themselves to the new unified tax regime. We believe the challenges thrown up post-GST are transient. The current challenges will cease to be issues six months down the line.Traditionally, the Indian economy has been savings oriented and these have largely been in the form of physical savings. Post demonetisation, there has been a definite shift towards financial assets. This has resulted in large flows to mutual funds and life insurance companies.We believe this behaviour is structural though partly driven by the momentum in the markets. Over the next few years, the trend towards channelising savings into financial assets will continue to gather momentum. Looking at the overall flows into financial products since demonetisation, we can say it has been the best in the recent past.We have been observing a pick up in the capex cycle, albeit in a small way in certain sectors. We believe that the capex cycle will be majorly driven by the government in 2018-19. Sectors such as roads, renewable energy, defence, railways etc. will see significant capex being incurred.There have been signs of green shoots emerging in the rural sector. Thus we are positive on the rural theme. Some of the factors that lead us to believe in the rural growth story are crop protection insurance which has picked up significantly. This means the rural economy will not suffer vagaries of monsoon going forward.We are also seeing some improvement in the Minimum Support Price (MSP) for farmers. One of the best indicators has been the sharp rise in tractor sales, which has been one of the finest in the last few years. We believe as we approach 2019 the government will focus on reviving the rural sector leading us to have a positive view on the rural theme.We have a neutral view on the oil and gas sector. We prefer upstream companies given our positive bias towards crude prices, as we anticipate it to rise in the medium term. The ability of downstream companies to freely price petrol and diesel may be a challenge given the current scenario. Upstream companies are currently trading at cheap valuations with attractive dividend yields.The telecom sector has been through a very challenging patch and opportunities emerge out of challenges. As the industry consolidates, it will eventually lead to 3-4 large telecom companies operating in the sector. Therefore, we believe there is an opportunity to invest in this sector and we have a contrarian view on the sector.The private sector banks have been expensive compared to PSU banks for the last 15 years on relative valuations and yet they have delivered superior returns. What seems expensive in the private banking sector today appears reasonable as one views the full year’s numbers down the line.Since private sector banks have managed to grow at a healthy rate, their valuations have remained expensive. Therefore sometimes, we prefer to remain invested in expensive stocks/companies which have a better track record of growth and ability to continue growing faster. We are also positive on a few PSU banks which have a large retail franchise and geographical spread.We have concerns about the quality of growth of NBFCs, as we believe that valuations of many NBFCs have run ahead of time. Therefore, currently we are very selective in our investments in NBFCs.The yields on 10-year G-Sec have moved to 6.75% and RBI is hinting at no rate cut right now. Therefore, we believe the increase in bond rates which have happened in the last two months has already been priced in. Due to this we expect yields to remain range bound and accordingly we are running a moderate duration of 4 to 4.5 years which is closer to that of the benchmark rate.
