The banking industry is facing many headwinds. It is not only weighed down by its own problems, but also due to various changes like the Goods and Services Tax ( GST ), bankruptcy laws and slumping demand for funds.In an interaction with ET journalists,, talks about the pain and the gains that the economy may see in the next few years. Edited excerpts:You would consolidate if you have a troubled piece and a healthy piece, and by consolidating, you are making one, which is healthy. You don’t want to consolidate for a healthy bank to become unhealthy. You want to consolidate for scale, but scale should ensure that the problem created today is prevented from reappearing tomorrow. I think a lot of infrastructure issues need to be resolved before you get into consolidation. If it is not plugged, these issues will come up after three-four years. There is shortage of capital for PSU banks. First, provide equity to healthier banks and then look at consolidation. It is very difficult for small PSU banks to get capital as you see in some of their QIPs.There are three parts of stress — one is realisation that there is stress, and second is public recognition of the stress, and the third is resolution. The first part is done, means everyone is aware there is problem. Second part is not happening. For resolution, you need a seller and a buyer. You have a willing seller because the seller is forced to resolve. But you don’t have a willing buyer. So who is the willing buyer? The willing buyer is the promoter himself. There is really no other person who want this assets. Or the willing buyer is a financier. If the promoter buys now, he will not get it cheap. He knows the moment it goes to the next stage, this poor willing seller has no option but to liquidate and he will get a far cheaper price.Now, a financier will want to buy if there is a return. He is looking at 30% return and he won’t buy unless he gets it at a good price. A realisable price during the resolution period is not good enough because you don’t have an economy that is kicking. In all probability, it will be promoters who would buy. He may do it openly, or couch under some limited company. I don’t see it happening fast enough and it is very painful for the seller.In each and every case, you find promoters are very keen to buy. But should you be selling back to the same promoter? He has created problem for the poor seller. Now, if he is the only bidder and he says 50% haircut. If the promoter is offering 50% and someone else is offering 40%, as a banker I don’t have a choice. Fifty percent is better than 40%. So, the moment I get above 50%, I am better off because I have a fear of 100% provision.Nothing has changed in underwriting. Let’s look at some of the issues that are creating the problem. One is what I call sectoral. That means a lot of problems are in infrastructure, roads, power, telecom, which means these sectors have gone through a lot of stress. The second part of the problem is policy related. If you roll out a road project and as the government or an agency, you have to fund it regularly, but you have not done that funding, and it suddenly becomes my responsibility.The other problem is concentration. As a banker, I take a call that since everyone is funding a road project, I will also do that. Another problem is mispricing. My investment is risky like an equity, but it’s in the form of debt and priced like debt. When you look at it in totality, it is not a problem that can be repeated again. As an underwriter, what can I control? Maybe I can have a better process, but some of these remain.GST again falls into three categories — the good, the bad, and the ugly. The organised part is good and they are a little concerned about the processrelated issues. The bad is the intermediate piece which is partly organised and partly unorganised and they are fighting more of the economics, whether the rate should be 28% or 18% or 5%. But the ugly one is the unorganised because the problem part of GST is that if you have anything to do with the chain and you are not organised, then you are in trouble. But if you are organised and you are part of the GST chain, it’s great for the system. Two years down the line, it is going to be very good for the system. So why is the ugly category not wanting to be part of the chain? His problem is less of GST. His problem is more of income tax . If I was not disclosing anything, and suddenly you say be part of the chain, I don’t mind. But I have never shown an income of more than Rs 2 lakh, so, how will I show my real income of a crore of rupees.A fresh problem may happen arising out of the third segment, which is the ugly part. People, who are not part of the chain, will be left out. There is a good probability, I would say. If you choose to stay away, it would be a problem.If I were to put a number, 15-20% of that has happened. Two to three months after demonetisation, we thought they seem to have survived the episode. But now, we are finding trouble again. What has happened is for the first two to three months, of all them survived on the back of extra credit, more working capital and their own net worth. But beyond those initial pangs, they are finding it difficult. For example: For a steel trader, the prices are good, but 25% of his business was cash which you can’t do now. He is sitting on stock that he doesn’t know what to do with? Beyond a certain point, he is sputtering and some of these problems are becoming more pronounced now.In the past two-three months, it has changed. The lending to MSME was on the basis of limited information because he never had balance sheet that you could totally rely on. Whenever you lend to them, you assume that 25-30% is in cash. The totality is different from what is apparent on the balance sheet. Some of them will improve if they become part of the chain. In a way, if they start becoming part of the chain, it will ease the process of lending. If they are outside the chain, then it will be a matter of survival for them, because I will be worried about lending to them.
