The Goods and Services Tax (GST) will result in a drop in the prices of commodities while boosting manufacturing, State Finance Minister D. Jayakumar said on Friday. Speaking to mediapersons at the Chennai airport before leaving for New Delhi to take part in the GST rollout event, he said, “There is absolutely no need to be afraid. Prices will come down, manufacturing will increase. This is the truth. “Traders and businessmen had submitted a lot of representations to us, which were discussed in the [GST] Council. Based on these representations, the taxes on a number of items were brought down.”The compensation to be paid to Tamil Nadu for the losses incurred due to the transition to the new tax regime was predetermined, he said. The Finance Minister said that the State would be organising a number of awareness programmes regarding GST, which would be held in all districts and zonal regions. To a query on the milk adulteration issue, Mr. Jayakumar said the government was very clear that the guilty would be punished. “The government will tackle this with an iron hand,” he said, adding that such an offence should be punishable by hanging. The AIADMK (Amma) is supporting GST as it has “no other option,” said party propaganda secretary and Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha M. Thambi Durai. Recalling that the Union Finance Minister conceded to some of the demands of former chief minister Jayalalithaa on GST, Mr. Thambi Durai said the party decided to support it “even though we are not completely for it.”
Top automaker Maruti Suzuki India (MSI) has slashed the prices of its models by up to 3 per cent with immediate effect in order to pass on the Goods and Services Tax benefit to its customers.
In a statement on Saturday, the company said it had transmitted the entire benefit of the GST rates on vehicles to its buyers. “The ex-showroom prices of Maruti Suzuki models have come down by up to 3 per cent. The rate of reduction varies across locations depending on VAT rates applicable prior to the GST,” MSI said. The company, however, hiked prices of diesel variants of Ciaz and Ertiga models with smart hybrid technology by over Rs 1 lakh because of withdrawal of tax concessions on mild hybrid vehicles under the GST framework. The price hike on the models will also vary from State to State. The company sells a range of vehicles from Alto 800 to S-Cross that were priced between Rs 2.46 lakh to Rs 12.03 lakh (ex-showroom Delhi).
Tata Motors-owned Jaguar Land Rover on July 1, 2017, reduced prices of its entire vehicle range in India on an average by 7% to pass on benefit of reduced tax incidence under the Goods and Services Tax (GST). The company said it is fully geared up for the new tax regime and its vehicles will be available under the new prices with immediate effect from any of its 25 retail outlets across India. “On an average, on the basis of ex-showroom Delhi prices, the reduction in the prices of our vehicles across the range will be around 7%,” Jaguar Land Rover India President and Managing Director Rohit Suri told PTI. The Jaguar portfolio in India includes XE with a starting price of ₹34.64 lakh, XF starting at ₹44.89 lakh, F-PACE ₹67.37 lakh onward and XJ with a starting point of ₹97.39 lakh (ex-showroom prices across India). On the other hand, the Land Rover range includes the Discovery Sport starting at ₹40.04 lakh, Range Rover Evoque at ₹42.37 lakh upward, Range Rover Sport beginning at ₹89.44 lakh and Range Rover with a starting price point of ₹1.59 crore (ex-showroom in India). Under the new GST, large luxury cars and SUVs with engine capacity of over 1,500 cc are slated to attract a 15% cess over and above peak rate of 28%, thereby bringing down the overall tax incidence compared to around 50% under the previous taxation system. Asked about the company’s preparedness of the new system, Mr. Suri said, “We are absolutely ready. We have been working on this for the last 8-9 months to be ready. Although we had to modify some of the earlier plans closer to GST implementation, even our partners and supply chain is ready.” He said that with the GST regime kicking in, the company expects reduction in transportation time for its vehicles from the company’s Pune facility to different parts of the country.
People planning to purchase white goods will have to shell out more money from Saturday as most appliances and durable makers have increased their prices in the new tax regime under GST. Durable makers would also go for another hike before the festive seasons as the industry is considering a price revision based on input credit, when their existing stock of raw materials and components would replenish. “For our sector, the net tax would go up. The current tax rate is around 25-27 per cent and would go to 28 per cent. Therefore, immediately the consumer price, which is market operating price, would go up if brand and dealers want to retain the same margin,” said Godrej Appliances Business Head and Executive vice-president Kamal Nandi. Videocon COO C M Singh echoed similar views. Although trade partners and dealers have exhausted their stocks by showering discounts up to 50 per cent, makers still have finished and raw materials lying at warehouses and would take two-three months to avail the tax credit and bring it at pre-GST level. “Once we start getting input credit from the freshly purchased raw material, which would happen down the line in two months, then we would have price at the same level as pre GST days,” Singh said. Companies are getting their price list reviewed and from Monday onwards, dealers would start restocking based on GST prices. “By Monday or Tuesday we expect price list of all brands to be out and then business would start. Our trade partners have already liquidated their stocks and would start buying,” said Nandi. However, company as Panasonic would take a decision in this regard next week only. “It would be not from tomorrow, hopefully we will review the need by early next week,” said Panasonic India Director Sales and Service Ajay Seth. Moreover, the makers are not expecting a “huge spike” in sales in the beginning. “It would be a gradual offtake,” said Mr. Nandi. Over price review before the festive season, Mr. Singh said: “This is bound to happen because people are waiting for a price correction as there has been an impact of 2-3 per cent because of GST...they have to do it in order to sustain.” According to Mr. Nandi, the industry would go for a price correction again possibly in September, depending on the input tax credit and commodity price. Festive season starts from Dussehra and goes till Diwali and during that period durable makers account up to 35 per cent of their sales.
