Global ratings agency Moody's on Sunday said the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime will be positive for India's credit profile as it will contribute to productivity gains and higher GDP growth as well as support higher government revenue generation through improved tax compliance. Meanwhile, premier industry body Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) said the Indian industry is prepared for the roll-out of the GST, adding that the regime will contribute to ease of doing business and accelerate new business ventures. William Foster, Vice-president, Sovereign Risk Group, Moody's Investors Service, said, “Over the medium term, we expect that the GST will contribute to productivity gains and higher GDP growth by improving the ease of doing business, unifying the national market and enhancing India's attractiveness as a foreign investment destination.” It will also support higher government revenue generation through improved tax compliance and administration, he said in a statement, adding that both will be positive for India's credit profile, which is constrained by a relatively low revenue base. He further said, “We expect improved tax compliance to be driven by: (1) incentivisation of tax credits in a GST system; (2) greater ease of compliance through usage of a common, shared IT infrastructure between the central government and the states; and (3) a reduction in the overall cost of compliance from simplified tax rates, uniform across the country. We expect the net impact of GST on government revenues to be positive.” Shobana Kamineni, President, CII, said, “… it (GST) gives us tremendous confidence that the Government will continue to facilitate investments and simplify the business environment. CII and Indian industry is committed to ensuring the success of GST for boosting India's growth and development.” To ensure a successful rollout, the CII has undertaken to hold about 100 GST clinics across the country while also bringing out informative webinars for the benefit of industry, she said. The CII president said the GST is based on self-compliance with the input tax credit as a powerful incentive to businesses to step into the tax fold. “Input tax credit will curb inflation by avoiding tax-on-tax. We believe that most businesses would pass on the benefits of input tax credit to consumers so that inflation would be curbed,” she said.
With India moving towards its biggest tax reform, here’s how various sectors in India have reacted to the implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) and how it will impact business. Hotel owners find 28% tax steep for cheaper rooms; travel sector satisfied. Following the implementation of the GST, the hospitality and travel sectors expect teething issues in the first few months but are not unduly worried, expecting support from government. OYO Rooms Founder and CEO Ritesh Agarwal said, “There may be challenges in compliance and implementation but over time, there will be more clarity and familiarity, enabling all stakeholders to adjust, adapt and adhere.” However, the Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India (FHRAI) Vice President Garish Oberoi said the 28 per cent GST for hotel rooms with a tariff of Rs 7,500 per night and above is very steep. He asked the government to keep that rate only for rooms with tariff of Rs 10,000 per night and above. As far as the travel sector goes, the GST rate for tour packages has increased marginally from 4.5% to 5% and players do not expect that to impact the holiday demand.
The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) has said that the GST will incentivise exports, help expand the tax net, contribute to the ease of doing business and accelerate new business ventures. “Input tax credit will curb inflation by avoiding tax-on-tax. We believe that most businesses would pass on the benefits of input tax credit to consumers so that inflation would be curbed,” CII President Shobana Kamineni said. She added that the industry is prepared for implementing the GST.
The Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO) has approached the government to reduce the restrictions on using duty credit scrips. A duty credit scrip is an incentive provided by the government to exporters. It is given to promote exports by providing tax incentives to exporters. It is a pass that allows holders to import goods by not paying a certain amount in import duties. But with the implementation of GST, the new rules say that these scrips can now be utilised only for payment of basic Customs duty and not Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST). Earlier, manufacturing exporters who import raw material for export purposes were allowed to utilise these scrips for payment of Customs, excise duty and service tax. FIEO Director General Ajay Sahai said exporters are worried as they have to arrange funds for payment of GST, which will be refunded to them upon exports. “This may lead to a blocking of funds for over six months in many cases, thus affecting competitiveness of exports,” Mr. Sahai said.
Ready-to-move in apartments will get costlier under GST as developers with large unsold inventories are planning to pass on the higher tax burden to home-buyers. Under GST, the effective tax on under-construction projects has gone up to 12%, which is an increase of 6.5%. The actual GST rate is 18% on realty, but allows one-third of the tax to be deducted from the land value, from the total cost charged by the developer. “While developers might still get some benefits for projects that are in nascent stages, they will have to bear the tax burden for the ready-to-move-in projects since they are kept out of the GST ambit,” House of Hiranandani Chairman and Managing Director Surendra Hiranandani said. Anarock Property Consultants Chairman Anuj Puri said the affordable housing sector will not be impacted as there will be no tax under GST for the affordable housing scheme.
Unlike realty, the durables sector is unlikely to pass on the burden of higher tax to the buyers, as the industry is expecting only a marginal price revision despite the category being placed under the highest tax slab of 28% under GST. The tax rate for the sector was around 25-27%. “Home appliances have become a necessity now with evolving consumer lifestyle and a lower tax slab would have made appliances more affordable in a low-penetrated market. With 28% tax under the GST, we expect the consumer price of home appliances to marginally go up by 1-2%. This could have an impact on demand in the short-run,” says Godrej Appliances business head Kamal Nandi.
The steel sector is feeling bullish after the GST roll out. Players in the sector feel that with GST, unorganised players will have to move to organised form of doing business. Steel Users Federation of India (SUFI) has said GST has abolished the special additional duty (SAD) on imported goods which was a very cumbersome procedure. Indian Stainless Steel Development Association (ISSDA) President K K Pahuja says GST will give the unorganised sector not other choice but to be tech-compliant. “People evading taxes would not be able to survive any longer,” Mr. Pahuja said.
The cotton textile industry is also feeling positive. Southern India Mills Association (SIMA) Chairman M Senthilkumar has welcomed the move to bring the entire cotton textile value chain at the lowest slab rate of 5% GST. He said the industry had been suffering with numerous taxes and different types of cess which were adding to the cost indirectly.
With India moving towards its biggest tax reform, here’s how various sectors in India have reacted to the implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) and how it will impact business. Following the implementation of the GST, the hospitality and travel sectors expect teething issues in the first few months but are not unduly worried, expecting support from government. OYO Rooms CEO Ritesh Agarwal said: “There may be challenges in compliance and implementation but over time, there will be more clarity and familiarity, enabling all stakeholders to adjust, adapt and adhere.” However, the Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India vice president, Garish Oberoi, said the 28% GST for hotel rooms with a tariff of ₹7,500 per night and above is very steep. He asked the government to keep that rate only for rooms with tariff of ₹10,000 per night and above. For the travel sector, the GST rate for tour packages has increased marginally from 4.5% to 5%. The Federation of Indian Export Organisations (FIEO) has approached the government to reduce the restrictions on using duty credit scrips — a pass that allows holders to import goods by not paying a certain amount in import duties. But with the implementation of GST, these scrips can now be utilised only for payment of basic customs duty and not Integrated Goods and Services Tax. Earlier, manufacturing exporters who imported raw material for export purposes were allowed to utilise these scrips for payment of customs, excise duty and service tax. FIEO Director General Ajay Sahai said exporters were worried as they have to arrange funds for payment of GST, which will be refunded to them upon exports. “This may lead to a blocking of funds for over six months in many cases, thus affecting competitiveness of exports,” Mr. Sahai said. The steel sector is feeling bullish after the GST rollout. Players in the sector said that with GST, unorganised players will have to move to the organised form of doing business. Steel Users Federation of India has said GST has abolished the special additional duty on imported goods which was a very cumbersome procedure. Indian Stainless Steel Development Association president K.K. Pahuja said GST will give the unorganised sector no other choice but to be tech-compliant. “People evading taxes would not be able to survive any longer.” The cotton textile industry is also feeling positive. Southern India Mills Association chairman M. Senthil Kumar has welcomed the move to bring the entire cotton textile value chain at the lowest slab rate of 5% GST.
Tata Motors has reported a 10% drop in domestic passenger vehicles sales in June 2017 as compared with the same period last year on account of subdued consumer sentiment in the pre-GST implementation stage, according to the company. “In June 2017, Tata Motors passenger vehicles sales were impacted by the mixed reactions towards GST resulting in low buying sentiment,” according to a statement. The passenger vehicle business sales slid 10% to 11,176 units while commercial vehicles’ domestic business reported sales of 25,678 units, falling 2%, as compared with June 2016. The company’s passenger and commercial vehicles total sales (including exports) in June 2017 declined 9% to 40,358 vehicles, according to the statement.
Stocks hit the upper end of the trajectory on Monday as the Sensex jumped 285 points with a solid show from FMCG, metal and realty indices. In the process, the 30—share Sensex and the 50—share Nifty hit almost a one—week high level. Investors made a big bet on the biggest tax reform in independent India, the Goods and Services Tax, which came into force from July 1. The Sensex resumed higher at 31,156.04 and read 31,206.30 at 1137 hours, a gain of 284.69 points, or 0.92 per cent. The NSE Nifty moved higher by 84.15 points, or 0.88 per cent, to 9,605.05 at 1137 hours. Index heavyweight and cigarette maker ITC jumped 6.08 per cent after taxation clarity on cigarettes. The Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) reportedly removed excise and additional excise duty on cigarettes while the National Calamity Contingent continued to stay in force. It was followed by M&M 1.60 per cent, Maruti 1.50 per cent and Tata Steel 1.04 per cent. Asian stocks were mixed, tracking US markets. Foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) sold shares worth a net Rs 160.48 crore last Friday, as per provisional data. Domestic institutional investors (DIIs) bought shares worth a net Rs 1,195.71 crore last Friday.
Two-wheeler major TVS Motor Company has reduced prices of its models by up to ₹ 4,150 to hand down GST benefit to customers. “The price reduction is in the range of ₹ 350 to ₹1,500 in the commuter segment. In the premium segment products, the prices are reduced up to ₹ 4,150 depending on each state,” TVS Motor Company has said in a statement. Dealers will be given suitable assistance on the opening stock as on July 1, 2017, purchased by them at a pre—GST price, the company said. Hero MotoCorp has also announced its decision to cut prices by up to ₹ 1,800 banking on the GST launch. The actual benefit varies from state to state, depending on pre— and post—GST rates, the company added. Already, various automakers such as Maruti Suzuki, Toyota and Jaguar Land Rover have reduced prices to transmit the GST relief down the line.
