Manufacturing activity slowed to a four-month low in June due to challenges posed by the implementation of Goods and Services Tax, a challenging economic environment, and water shortages in parts of the country, according to a private sector survey. The Nikkei India Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index slipped to 50.9 in June from 51.6 in May. A reading above 50 implies an expansion, while one below 50 denotes a contraction. “One factor weighing on the PMI reading for June was a softer expansion in new work, the index’s largest sub-component,” the report said. “Growth of total order books eased to a four-month low, with the intermediate goods category the key source of weakness. New orders received by consumer goods firms continued to rise strongly, while capital goods producers recovered from May’s contraction.” The report noted that output across the manufacturing sector rose for the sixth consecutive month in June, which survey participants linked to ongoing increases in client demand. “That said, challenging economic conditions, water shortages and the upcoming implementation of the goods & services tax (GST) reportedly hampered growth,” the report added. “For the third month in a row, production growth in India eased during June,” Pollyanna De Lima, Economist at HIS Markit and author of the report said. “In many cases, businesses indicated that growth was held back as a reflection of water scarcity and the impending introduction of the goods & services tax (GST). While the new tax system is anticipated by some firms to generate more business, others expect the GST to have a detrimental impact on their order books. As such, overall optimism slipped to a three-month low.” Looking ahead, Ms. De Lima predicted that, with the impacts of demonetisation largely over and GST unlikely to substantially derail consumer spending, real GDP growth would hit 7.3% for FY18.
Major two-wheeler makers have cut prices of their vehicles across models following the introduction of GST (Goods and Services Tax) from the midnight of June 30. TVS Motor Company, Honda Motorcycles & Scooters India Pvt. Ltd., and Suzuki Motorcycle India Private Limited (SMIPL) have all announced a reduction in prices. The price reduction announced by TVS Motor ranges between ₹350 and ₹1,500 in the commuter segment. In the premium segment products, prices have been reduced up to ₹4,150 depending on each State. “Dealers will be given suitable assistance on the opening stock as on July 1, 2017 purchased by them at pre-GST price,” said a statement from TVS Motor. Suzuki Motorcycle India Private Limited (SMIPL) said a unified Indian market would be beneficial to the automobile sector as it would have a levelling impact. “Under GST, consumer and premium segment vehicles would witness a 2% decrease in taxes, and Suzuki is very pleased to pass this benefit onto its customers in the form of reduced prices. Suzuki vehicles, which fall under the 28% tax slab, will see a reduction in price,” it said in a release. Yamaha had already announced a revision in its prices. Honda said its customers could get “significant savings up to ₹5,500 depending on the model and the State of purchase.”
Ford India and Honda Cars have cut prices across models, following the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax (GST). Honda Cars India reduced the prices of its premium SUV CR-V by up to ₹1,31,663, BR-V prices by up to ₹30,387 and mid-sized sedan City in the range of ₹16,510 to ₹28,005. Honda’s compact sedan Amaze prices have dropped by up to ₹14,825, hatchback Brio by up to ₹12,279, Jazz by ₹10,031 and that of WR-V by ₹10,064. All these prices are ex-showroom New Delhi. Ford India has reduced its vehicle prices by up to 4.5%. The highest cut will be in Mumbai with the Ford’s flagship SUV Endeavour becoming cheaper by up to ₹3 lakh. The company spokesperson said the company would pass on the benefits in the range of up to 4.5% across the range. Korean carmaker Hyundai spokesman said the company was working on the post-GST prices. “The new rates will be announced in a day or two.” Recently, Mercedes Benz, BMW, Maruti and Toyota also reduced prices to pass on benefits to customers.
As many as 22 States, including Delhi, West Bengal and Maharashtra, have abolished check posts within three days of the implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST). Eight States, including Assam, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, and some north-eastern States, are also in the process of abolishing check posts, a finance ministry statement said. State border check posts scrutinise material and location-based tax compliance, resulting in delays in delivery of goods, besides causing environment pollution as trucks queue up for clearance. One of the key objectives of GST, which came into effect from July 1, is to make India a single market where goods and services can flow seamlessly. The other important States that have abolished check posts include Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. With the abolition of check posts, the long queues often witnessed at State borders will not be seen.
Every household is entitled to 12 cylinders of 14.2-kg each at subsidised rates in a year.
Domestic cooking gas (LPG) price has been hiked by up to ₹32 per cylinder — the steepest increase in six years — following implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST). Subsidised LPG rates have been increased to ₹477.46 per 14.2-kg cylinder from ₹446.65 in Delhi after GST was implemented from July 1. In the previous indirect tax regime where separate factory-gate duty and sales tax were levied, LPG attracted a zero or nil excise duty all over the country. VAT or sales tax was nil in Delhi as well as Chandigarh, Haryana, Jammu and Kashmir, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and some north-eastern states. It ranged from 1 per cent to 5 per cent in other states. However, under GST, which subsumed more than a dozen central and state levies, a 5 per cent tax was levied on subsidised LPG. This essentially meant that states where VAT was nil or less than 5 per cent, rates have gone up. Besides Delhi, subsidised LPG price has been hiked by ₹31.67 per cylinder to ₹480.32 in Kolkata and ₹31.41 in Chennai to ₹465.56, according to information available from oil companies. In Mumbai, where a VAT of 3 per cent was applicable previously, the price has gone up by ₹14.28 to ₹ 491.25 per cylinder. This is the steepest increase in domestic subsidised LPG rate since June 25, 2011, a hike of ₹50 per cylinder, which was necessitated due to a jump in international oil prices. Every household is entitled to 12 cylinders of 14.2-kg each at subsidised rates in a year. Any requirement beyond that has to be purchased at market price. The rate of market-priced 14.2-kg cylinder in Delhi is ₹564. Sources said the 5 per cent GST resulted in a ₹26.88 increase in rate per cylinder in Delhi and the remaining hike of about Rs 3 is because of the decision since June last year to raise prices by about ₹ 2 to cut the subsidy. The rate of non-subsidised LPG, which consumers pay after exhausting their quota of below-market priced bottles, went up by ₹11.5 to ₹564. Such bottles attract an 18 per cent GST.
