The automobile industry will see growth in the short-term, driven partly by price reduction and restoration of normal inventory levels at dealerships as the transition to GST has been “surprisingly smooth,” Mahindra & Mahindra (M&M) Managing Director Pawan Goenka said on Thursday. However, with the GST Council firm on high tax rate for hybrid vehicles, auto companies which had big plans for this category will have to rethink their strategy, he added. Addressing a conference call on GST, Mr. Goenka also raised concerns over Maharashtra increasing road tax after GST implementation to negate loss of octroi, saying it could negate gains for customers and it should not become norm for other states to follow. “Definitely, in the short-term I see positive growth, more growth than what we would otherwise have as a result of GST down stocking. Also, price reductions across the board will also drive growth,” he said. In the run up to the Good and Services Tax (GST) implementation from July1, auto firms had reduced inventory level at dealership by about a week in June. Usually dealers keep inventory of four to six weeks. “In short-term there is going to be inventory build up at dealers because the (pre-GST) inventory levels were lower than what the norm is. Inventory refill will happen in the month of July, August and then festive months of September and October,” Mr. Goenka said. The discounts offered by various companies in June were higher than the industry would usually offer during the month, he added. Mr. Goenka said, however, that the growth in the auto industry would depend on other factors such as interest rates on vehicle loans, although overall economy and good monsoon augur well for the sector. On transition to GST, Mr. Goenka said for M&M, “the transition has been surprisingly smooth” with just one supplier who wasn’t ready on the first day. He said dispatches of automobiles and tractors from plants and spares from warehouses have started without any disruption. When asked about the impact of GST on hybrid vehicles, he said automobile industry had approached the GST Council and government seeking to reconsider keeping the category at 28% plus 15% cess. “It certainly seems the decision is final. If it happens (reduction of rate) it is fine but I am not expecting it to happen in the short-term,” he said adding that hybrids will become less attractive and difficult as it would not get any concession from the Centre. “ Many players who would have aggressive hybrid plans will have to rethink their plans,” he said.
