Despite being engaged in fierce competition, German carmakers are striving to grow the base of the luxury car market in India by introducing latest range of products, reducing the cost of ownership and offering finance at comparatively cheaper rates. Though the base of the luxury car market has grown over 11 to 12 times in the last 10 years with the entry of multiple players, the market is still very small. Last year all luxury car makers sold about 34,000 units which is 1.2% of the passenger car population in India. The luxury car makers are now working hard to grow this base to atlast 5% which will accrue huge volume for them. In Germany the percentage of luxury car segment is 24% of all cars sold in and in the US it is about 10 to 12%, in China it is a8%, in Malaysia it is 5.4% and in Indonesia 2.5%. The tax reduction in the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime on luxury cars is expected to help the car makers to achieve their target sooner than expected. Soon after the announcement of the GST rates in May, all car makers cut prices by 2 to 9% to bring the prices in line with the post GST rates and it resulted in rising sales. Market leader Mercedes-Benz (MB) India sold 40% more cars in June this year as compared to June 2016. In the March to June quarter the company sold 3521 cars, up 18% year on year. For the January to June period the company sold 7171 units, up 8.7%. Roland Folger, Managing Director & CEO, Mercedes-Benz India said, “We continue our leadership position in the Indian luxury car market. This sales performance further strengthens our customer centric strategy, which is bearing fruit.” He said the company wants the base the grow so that many people can experience luxury and be safe while driving. However, the prohibitive pricing on account of high tax structure remains as the key reason for the segment not growing to its fullest potential. “The GST regime however, promises a growth potential for the luxury car industry. With 1.2%, India has one of the lowest penetration rates for the luxury segment worldwide, significantly behind countries like Russia, China, Brazil and even Malaysia. With GST regime, we see an opportunity for this sector to unleash its potential and contribute to the overall automotive sector and GDP positively,” Mr Folger said. He said the segment will be more competitive and increase the customer base and make luxury cars more accessible. During the January to June period BMW Group India reported 11.5 % growth in unit sales by selling 4569 units. Vikram Pawah, President, BMW Group India said, “BMW Group India will move forward with the ‘Power to Lead’ and will continuously remain a value driven, customer focused organization with a clear goal to be the best and set a benchmark in the industry in every aspect with passion, performance and excellence. “Today BMW Group India is the fastest growing luxury car brand in the country but our primary goal is to grow the size of the luxury car market in India. We believe leading the growth is more important than anything, even more important than being just number one,” he added. Without disclosing the numbers Audi India head Rahil Ansari said, the company has achieved more than what it expected for this year. “We expected the luxury car market to showcase a better performance this year and we are already seeing the signs. We welcome the GST. Hopefully this will be a new and exciting phase of the luxury car business. The new realigned prices post the GST offer great opportunity to expand the market and widen our customer base.” Mr Ansari said. Analysts said the time is now conducive for faster growth of this segment. “It is the best time for the luxury car market and the luxury car makers,” said Abdul Majeed, Partner and Leader Automotive, PwC. “The tax rates have come down, the economic activity in the country is growing and it will lead to demand for more luxury cars. With good financing options from auto companies and introduction of luxury cars in the entry segment, more young people are buying luxury vehicles. Localization will further bring prices down and all these factors will help the luxury car industry to clock a volume of 1 lakh in 2020 which would be a great achievement.” Mr Majeed added.
The aggregate topline of companies in key sectors, excluding banking, financial services and oil, is likely to have clocked about 7% growth in the first quarter of 2017-18, due to a pick-up in consumption, according to CRISIL Research. In its ‘Q1 FY18 Results Outlook,’ CRISIL said the growth in these sectors, accounting for 61% of the market capitalisation of companies listed on the National Stock Exchange, was hemmed in by factors such as a rise in input costs, an appreciating rupee and output cuts ahead of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime rollout from July 1. “Consumption-driven sectors, including automobiles, airlines, FMCG and retail, but excluding telecom, are estimated to have grown at a healthy pace of 10-11%. This is heartening, considering growth had slowed following demonetisation to 4-7% in the second half of fiscal 2017,” Prasad Koparkar, senior director, CRISIL Research said. He added that commodity-linked sectors had been expected to do well, led by a robust increase in realisations in crude oil, steel and aluminium, and moderate growth in demand. However, export-linked sectors such as IT and pharmaceuticals, which had consistently outperformed the domestic industry by recording double-digit growth, is expected to have slowed down to only 3%. This follows strengthening of the rupee, a surge in protectionism across the globe and pricing pressure in the U.S. “The growth for the quarter would have been higher but for the Goods and Services Tax (GST), since manufacturers are expected to have limited production to clear existing inventory — especially in automobiles, FMCG and cement — before it took effect,” the rating agency’s research arm said. It added that there could be demand and supply disruptions in the short term due to GST, though from a long-term perspective, the new regime will lead to efficiency gains and greater tax compliance. Rahul Prithiani, director, Crisil Research said: “A rise in prices of key commodities such as crude oil, steel, aluminium and cement is expected to have pared the profitability of end-user sectors such as automobiles, petrochemicals, housing and tyres by ~130, ~230, ~330 and ~470 basis points (bps), respectively. The margin contraction could be much higher for pharma, at ~550 bps, given pricing pressure and lack of exclusivity period for generic drugs.”
