Paper mills that use recycled paper as raw material have sought uniform rate of duty for the paper sector under Goods and Services Tax (GST). Except for a few, most of the 800 paper mills in the country use recycled paper, according to P.G. Mukundan, secretary general, Indian Agro and Recycled Paper Mills’ Association, “We import 6 million tonnes of waste paper every year and the domestic availability is another 5 to 6 million tonnes,” Mr. Mukundan said. “The total paper consumption is nearly 15 million tonnes and we recover just 25 % of waste paper,” he said. Customs Duty on imported waste paper is zero per cent and the Excise Duty also used to be nil. A couple of states had levied 5% Value Added Tax. Under GST, waste paper attracts 12%. With availability issues in the international market and prices fluctuating, the paper industry wants to increase domestic sourcing of raw material and improve the recovery rate. However, the GST rate is not encouraging, he said. The GST on wood chips and other raw materials attract only 5% GST. Value added paper products such as facial tissue attract 18% duty. There should be a uniform rate for paper and paper products and it should be minimum, he said. “We have written to the government and the GST Council seeking clarifications on a few other issues too,” Mr. Mukundan said. For instance, books distributed under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan scheme through World Bank funding was exempted from Excise Duty. There is no mention about it in the GST. Production in paper mills have reduced by 10% to 15% mainly because of demand recession. There are some stocks with the mills too because of the slowdown in demand, he added.
The Goods and Services Tax (GST) system is not exposed directly to the Internet and has a dedicated round-the-clock security operations command centre in its network against cyberthreats, the government has told the Rajya Sabha. To a question, the government said on Friday that any interaction with the system was only through APIs (application programming interfaces). It had a multi-layered security architecture and had operational segregation through use of a virtual local area network. There was segregation of duties, least privilege access principles, Internet Protocol (IP) filtering and blocking of rogue IPs, resiliency at each layer, secure coding practices ensuring security of GST software development throughout Software Development Lifecycle, and at-rest and in-transit data encryption, the government said. The data sharing mechanism ensures that any data transfer from the GST system is in encrypted format. The system banks on thorough security testing and full-system vulnerability assessment and penetration testing of IT infrastructure, besides the apps used licensed tools and customised scripts, said the government. According to the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In), a total of 44,679, 49,455, 50,362 and 27,482 cybersecurity incidents were observed during 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017 (till June), respectively, the government said in response to another query. The types of cybersecurity incidents include phishing, scanning/probing, website intrusions and defacements, virus/malicious code, targeted attacks, ATM malware, ransomware and denial of service attacks among other threats. The government had taken a series of measures to strengthen the cybersecurity infrastructure. All financial institutions had been advised by CERT-In, through the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to conduct an audit by empanelled auditors on a priority basis and take immediate steps accordingly. All organisations providing digital payment services have been mandated to report cyber security incidents to CERT-In expeditiously. The government has also formulated a Cyber Crisis Management Plan for countering cyber attacks for implementation by all ministries and departments.
Ambiguity surrounding the Goods and Services Tax rate on various inputs is troubling the solar sector, with industry players also saying that their suppliers are not passing on the benefit arising out of input tax credits, leading to higher prices and eventually higher tariffs for customers. “There is no clarity when it comes to the GST rates,” Sanjeev Aggarwal, MD and CEO of Amplus Energy Solutions told The Hindu. “While the government is saying that there is a 5% rate on solar components, the truth is that the weighted average rate comes at about 10%. Some items are taxed at 18%, and some at the lower 5%. Others, like inverters, are even taxed at 28%.” “Suppliers have also not yet started passing on the benefits of the input tax credits to us, so we are not getting the advantage of that either,” Mr. Aggarwal added. While the 5% tax rate specified by the GST Council for solar components has increased the cost of the projects, the ambiguity over the other inputs — which are used for projects other than in the solar sector — is creating confusion among solar developers. “The module, which is almost half of the cost of the solar system..., earlier there was no tax on it,” Gagan Vermani, founder and CEO at MYSUN said. “Now, it has come under 5%. Ultimately, it will increase the cost of the modules by 5%. And, we have to pass this on to the customers. Our cost of procurement has gone up, so the selling price will also go up.” “There is also a little confusion on solar right now because the detailed gazette talks about structures, invertors, wires, and other components without specifying whether they are for solar or not,” Mr. Vermani added. “But there is a separate line item that says for solar utilities, the rate is 5%. So, there is confusion about whether an inverter, if it is being used for solar, comes under 5% or the normal rate of 28%.” “Because GST is an end-use tax, the government cannot even discriminate between uses by saying that, say, an inverter used for solar purposes will be taxed this much, but for other purposes at a higher rate,” Mr. Aggarwal said. “This will be very difficult to implement and will also lead to misuse. How will one prove for what purpose it is being used for?” “Everyday we are sitting with our tax consultants and trying to figure out the eventual impact on our projects,” Sanjay Garudapally, director, business development, Rays Power Infra said. “We are getting different answers. Some are saying 10%, others are saying other rates. Nothing has been clarified so far since GST has rolled out, but we expect something to be done in about three weeks to a month.”
