NEW DELHI: Honda Cars India has brought down prices of its models by up to Rs 1.31 lakh with immediate effect to help customers reap GST benefit. The company has cut price of its hatchback Brio by up to Rs 12,279 and that of compact sedan Amaze by up to Rs 14,825. Besides, it has slashed price of Jazz by up to Rs 10,031 and that of its recently launched model WR-V by up to Rs 10,064. Price of mid-sized sedan City has been reduced in the range of Rs 16,510 and Rs 28,005. The BR-V prices will come down by up to Rs 30,387. Its premium SUV CR-V has also seen a price drop of up to Rs 1,31,663. Honda is yet to decide on the revised pricing of Accord Hybrid. The revised prices are for ex-showroom Delhi and will vary from state to state. Already, various automakers such as Ford Toyota , Jaguar Land Rover and BMW have effected price cuts to transmit the GST relief down the line.
NEW DELHI: Domestic equity indices climbed up to 1 per cent on Monday on strong global cues and thanks to a sharp jump in shares of index heavyweight ITC Data showed every two out of three BSE stocks that traded for the day ended higher, as investors welcomed the GST on an optimistic note, even though some analysts said the tax overhaul is going to hurt India Inc’s earnings in the short term. The BSE Sensex rallied 300 points to end the session at 31,221. ITC (up 6.11 per cent), Hero MotoCorp (up 2.12 per cent) and Coal India (up 1.97 per cent) were the top gainers on the index while NTPC (down 1.17 per cent) was the top loser. “Investor sentiment was firmly launched in the positive zone for the day even as lackluster macro-economic data failed to dampen the mood,” said Karthikraj Lakshmanan, Senior Fund Manager – Equities of BNP Paribas Mutual Fund “With the onset of monsoon , we will now have to see whether it brings about any growth in the manufacturing sector. All the sectoral indices on the National Stock Exchange (NSE) traded in the green,” Lakshmanan added. Earlier, the 30-share pack opened at 31,156 against the previous close of 30,921. The Nifty50 closed the session 94 points higher at 9,615 with Infratel (up 6.19 per cent) fuelling the gains. Fertiliser stocks rallied up to 18 per cent after the GST Council on Friday reduced the tax rate on fertiliser from 12 per cent to 5 per cent, reducing the burden on farmers. Auto stocks hogged limelight, after domestic auto firms reported mixed sales numbers for June and announced price cuts after GST rollout. In the broader market, Ashok Leyland (up 7.25 per cent), Page Industries (up 4.66 per cent), and Jindal Steel (up 4.59 per cent) caused the S&P BSE Midcap index to shed over 164 points and end the session at 14,809. The S&P BSE Smallcap index gained 162 points to end the day at 15,572, with RS Software , ESL and TinPlate Company gaining up to 20 per cent. Among the sectoral indices, BSE FMCG index gained 3.40 per cent, with shares of GAEL, ITC, Cupid, and Dalmia Sugar rose up to 6 per cent. BSE Telecom and BSE Metal indices gained 2 per cent eachAmong specific stocks, cigarette maker ITC was among the top gainers – rising 9 per cent to hit a record high of Rs 353 during the session. In other news, the National Stock Exchange (NSE) may have to refile papers for its Rs 10,000 crore IPO after addressing issues related to alleged preferential access given to some brokers, watchdog Sebi's Chairman Ajay Tyagi said on Monday, terming the co-location case as ‘a serious matter’. In Asian markets, the Hang Seng index rose 0.1 per cent to 25,784, while the China Enterprises Index gained 0.5 per cent, to 10,412 on reports of a new bond trading link between the two, Reuters reported. Japan’s Nikkei share average slipped 0.1 per cent to 20,055.80. Elsewhere in the global financial markets, the pan-European STOXX 600 and euro zone blue chips advanced 0.6 per cent each, while Britain's FTSE 100 gained 0.4 per cent. In the commodity space, spot gold fell 0.3 per cent to $1,238.01 per ounce while Brent crude futures climbed 0.3 per cent, to $48.90 per barrel.
NEW DELHI: Electronics manufacturing in India is expected to touch USD 104 billion by 2020 and domestic manufacturers will benefit from GST implementation as cost will significantly come down, says a report. Despite a huge leap in projected production by 2020, the domestic manufacturing will meet only 26 per cent of the local demand, the joint study conducted by industry chamber Assocham and NEC Technologies said. "GST will give a major boost to the Indian electronics industry thereby, leading to subsequent increase in demand of locally-manufactured electronics," said the report titled 'Electricals & Electronics Manufacturing in India'. Under GST, cascading effects of taxes will be eliminated, the study said adding that firms will also be saving expenses incurred in warehousing and logistics which stood at approximately 5-8 per cent. Consequently, local manufacturers will be able to pass on the tax benefit to consumers in the form of price reduction, the report said. Total electronics manufacturing in India reached around USD 31 billion in 2015 and is expected to increase to USD 104 billion in 2020, as per the report. "Domestic production is expected to grow at a CAGR of 27 per cent during 2016-2020 to reach USD 104 billion in 2020, as compared to the CAGR of 9.6 per cent during 2010-2016," it said. The global electronics industry is valued at USD 1.75 trillion, it added. In terms of demand, the report said it is expected to grow at a CAGR of 41 per cent during 2016-2020 to reach USD 400 billion by 2020. This surge in demand is huge, which shows a positive outlook for the industry, it added.However, it added: "Although there is a huge leap in the projected production figures for 2020, the domestic production is projected to meet only 26 per cent of the domestic demand. "The report said targeted initiatives launched by the government have provided much needed impetus to local manufacturing but to make it self sustainable more support must be provided. "Though the production is growing at a significant rate, imports are also growing in order to cater to the exponentially rising demand," it said, adding at present India fulfils 60 per cent of its domestic demand through imports. "Electronic items are now the second most valued category of imports after petroleum products and if the situation persists, the country's electronics import bill may surpass its oil import expenses by 2020," the report added. The government has announced incentives of Rs 7.45 billion for electronic manufacturing which is expected to benefit domestic manufacturers,  it added. India witnessed an year-on-year production growth of around 33 per cent in 2015-16 reaching approximately USD 8.8 billion. The report said government has taken various initiatives like Make in India, Digital India and FDI relaxations , among others, which is expected to reduce the supply demand gap and boost manufacturing, thereby substituting imports.
It’s 3PM of July 1, the day 1 of GST rollout, at Dagina Bazaar, the busiest lane in the heart of Mumbai’s Zaveri Bazaar. The 60-odd jewellery shops on this lane have been open for business for four hours now, but not many customers have walked in. Barring a few enquiries, and some minor purchases, it is going to be a long futile wait till 8PM, when stocks are tallied and shutters downed. Buyers have stayed away from jewellery shops in the weeks leading to GST (goods and services tax). This Monday is no different from any day last week. “Business has been dull for over two weeks now. People are not sure how GST would affect them. Besides this is also not a jewellery-buying season,” says Anil Jain, owner of R.Pukhraj & Co, a jewellery wholesaler at Zaveri Bazaar. “Jewellers, on their part, have cut their stocks; they’re waiting for more clarity around new taxation regime. The general feeling is that gold demand will fall over the next two – three months. It may gather steam only after Raksha Bandhan, and firm up during Navratri,” predicts Anil Jain. On Saturday – a few hours past GST roll-out – gold and bullion was trending (intra-day) at Rs 28,400 per ten grams in Mumbai market. GST, per se, has not impacted gold prices much, but it has made the yellow metal a wee bit expensive for end-customers. Tax rate on gold has moved up from 1% to 3% under GST. That apart, repairing and remaking charges come under a higher GST bracket. These mark-ups would be added to the final purchase-bill handed out to customers, jewellers opine. So, if you had bought a 10-gram-gold coin on Saturday, you’d be required to pay Rs 29,350 – about 500 rupees more than what you would have otherwise paid in the pre-GST regime. For a 50-gram coin, you may have to shell out over Rs 2500 as GST. “The GST pay-out will go up in tandem with the quantity of gold you buy,” explains Inder Jain, president of Shri Mumbadevi Dagina Bazaar Association. “That said this price-rise will not discourage people from gold jewellery… They’ll still buy, irrespective of what the price is or how high the taxation is,” believes Inder Jain, who is also the promoter of Umedmal Tilokchand Zaveri, one of the oldest jewellery shops in Zaveri Bazaar. India is amongst the largest consumers of “yellow metal” in the world. Despite a 21% drop in gold purchases last year, Indians bought 675.5 tonnes of the gold in 2016. The significant drop last year was not because of ‘demand saturation,‘ but was consequential to the government’s demonetisation drive, PAN card requirement for gold purchase and a long-winding jewellers’ strike. In 2015, Indians bought over 857 tonnes of gold. “The demand will normalise towards year-end, when the wedding season would start,” assures T.Gnanasekar, director of CommTrendz Research. “GST may not impact gold demand much. Even when the government imposed customs duty a couple of years’ ago, it did not weaken overall gold demand,” Gnanasekar reasons. Beyond actual consumption, Indians have also started buying gold as an investible asset class. The yellow metal acts as a refuge area (for savvy traders and HNIs) when equities market collapse. According to some jewellers, higher GST rate may not work well for investors in gold. “Investors will think twice before buying gold in their portfolios now… And if they do, they will have to sell at very high prices to cover up for GST they paid (paid at the time of buying gold), and also eke out some profit,” says Vrishank Jain, a young jeweller at Zaveri Bazaar. Anil Jain of R.Pukhraj & Co adds: “Gold prices do not move up that fast… It does not spurt like stock market. So investors may not get a very profitable exit if they buy gold paying 3% GST. ”Most jewellers in Zaveri Bazaar expect gold prices to drop to Rs 27500 per ten grams in the short-term. Many of them are not expecting a lot of business till Navratri, which falls in end-September. Jewellers are hoping to use the “free time” to align their businesses to GST. Some large shop-owners at Zaveri Bazaar have already started bar-coding their stock; a few older members are trying to change their accounts – from traditional red cloth-bound chopda books to computers. Only 20% of Zaveri Bazaar shops have computerised their accounting system. “Now everything needs to be done on a computer,” guffaws a small shop-owner. The smooth-talking sethjis of Zaveri Bazaar are taking it easy for now, in anticipation of better days ahead.
AGRA/NEW DELHI: Households will have to shell out up to Rs 32 more for each cooking gas ( LPG ) cylinder from this month due to the twin impact of GST and a reduction in subsidy Consumers will also have to pay more for the two-year mandatory inspection, installation, administrative charges for documentation for new connections and additional cylinders as these have been put in the 18% slab under GST. LPG has been put in the 5% GST slab. Earlier, most states such as Delhi did not tax the green fuel, while some levied VAT ranging between 2% and 4%. Following the introduction of GST, the price of each LPG cylinder will rise by Rs 12-15 each in states that did not tax the fuel. The increase will depend on the gap between the GST rate and prevalent tax in states that levied VAT. A simultaneous reduction in subsidy amount from June will compound the impact for consumers. “The subsidy amount of Rs 119.85 paid to eligible consumers in Agra, for example, till June has also been reduced. According to the new notification, they will receive only Rs 107 in their bank accounts,“ Vipul Purohit, national secretary, All India LPG Distributors Federation, told TOI. Both the changes will have a combined impact of up to Rs 32 per cylinder, depending on the state. The small variation in prices among states is due to variable costs, such as transportation and logistics. Senior executives of staterun fuel retailers said there was no change in the subsidy paid to consumers due to GST. The subsidy amount varies each month due to variation in the gap with the international price. The tax component has to be borne by consumers just like they did in case of VAT. GST has, however, brought down the cost of commercial LPG cylinders by around Rs 69. Earlier, LPG for commercial use attracted 22.5% tax, which is down to 18% under GST.
MUMBAI: Business in banks may have been smooth since the Goods and Services Tax GST ) regime began two days back, but the banking and insurance activities of customers will begin to pinch as tax rates on these services have risen, said bankers. Most large sized banks had made significant changes to their IT systems in anticipation of the nationwide rollout of GST on July 1 and there has been no hiccup in the past two days, even though they were not normal banking days with July 1 seeing marginal activity since banks were busy closing books for the first quarter. But customers will have to pay more as banking services such as debit card, home loan processing fee, locker rentals, issuing of cheque books, cash handling charges and SMS alerts would attract higher taxes. “We are one of the largest tax paying entities in the country, so we have made sure that we can do the filings in every single state. Go Live has happened, so we are live everywhere,” said Jairam Sridharan, CFO of Axis Bank. “The first tax payments will happen in the next one month, but all the billings have changed to the GST format and we haven’t had any problem. ”State Bank of India and Axis are among the five banks that have been allowed to take GST payments across the country. SBI too announced its GST-readiness and said that GST payments could be made online through internet banking and SBI debit cards, or by using its 25,000-plus branches. “We are completely GST-ready, all systems have been integrated and tested and we haven’t come across any issues so far,” said Mrityunjay Mahapatra, DMD, SBI. “There are 40 internal applications which have been aligned with the GST guidelines. Transactions are happening successfully and we are seeing lot of them happening through internet banking. Several customers are also doing small value transactions to find whether the system is working or not. ”Some of the bigger private and multinational banks started modifying their front-end IT systems at the end of last year while several state-run banks and smaller private banks had floated tenders recently inviting IT companies to make them GST-ready. Recently, the Indian Banks Association had called for a meeting to check the preparedness for banks and found that they are more or less ready to face the new tax challenges. While most banks claim GST readiness, consumers will have to shell out more for banking services, insurance premium payments and credit card bills under the new regime. “Due to increased rate of tax on banking services from 15% to 18%, GST will result in increased cost of services offered to customers,” said Ravindra Marathe, CEO, Bank of Maharashtra. “GST has a mechanism of reconciliation of output services and input services, and banks may get the credit of each eligible input service. Overall, the monetary impact may be negative initially, but complete transparency in transactions will show positive results for the banks and the economy in the long term. ”Also, life and non-life premiums would involve an increase in taxes from 15% to 18%. “Though insurance customers will have to pay a higher rate of GST at 18% compared to 15% service tax earlier, the overall impact should be positive, given the convenience and simplicity associated with a single tax regime,” said Gopal Balachandran, chief financial officer, ICICI Lombard
MUMBAI: Even as real estate developers are busy preparing and fine-tuning their systems to align with the new tax regime, builders and brokers are expecting real estate sales to remain sluggish for some time as consumers are seeking more clarity on exact tax obligation on their transactions. Over the past few days, builders and brokers’ offices have been receiving queries from existing and prospective customers on how would resale of an under-construction apartment by an investor be treated under GST . Also, consumers want to know if any reimbursement or future payment adjustments are possible from developers’ input tax credit. “Customers will be in a discovery mode for a while, trying to analyse and follow a secure investment pattern for themselves. And we are talking about an industry which is just about to recover from the side effects of demonetization,” said Prakkash G Rohiira, director, Karma Realtors. “Allowing homebuyers to be induced into a wait-andwatch mode would alter the performance of the industry. ”Realtors reckon that ready-to-move in properties would be preferred by homebuyers now as that segment remains out of the GST ambit. However, such properties are likely to cost a bit more now as these properties won’t get any benefit of input tax credit. “While developers might still get some benefits for projects that are in nascent stage, they will have to bear the tax burden for ready-to-move in projects since they are kept out of the GST ambit,” said Surendra Hiranandani, CMD, House of Hiranandani. According to Hiranandani, while the intent is to streamline the tax administration and bring more businesses in the tax net, it is unlikely that GST will have any impact on property prices. He believes that the current rate of 12% on under-construction projects might marginally bring down prices in the affordable segment owing to the input tax credits, but it is unlikely that similar impact will be felt in mid-priced or premium developments. Last week, the government had notified the goods & services tax rate (GST) for construction of real estate at 18% as against the 12% announced earlier. However, with this rate, the government has also allowed deduction of land value equivalent to one-third of total amount charged by the developer, making effective tax rate same as 12%. According to experts, this revised rate is expected to be tax-neutral as the GST obligation for the property buyer would remain the same. More clarity is expected to emerge once the GST gets implemented and the government clears its stand on the abatement available for the land cost for calculating service tax on underconstruction projects . For premium projects where land cost forms around half the total expenditure in cities like Mumbai, apartment prices are likely to rise.
NEW DELHI: Amul has reduced prices of cottage cheese, dairy whitener and baby food, increased the price of ghee and left cheese, butter and ice cream unchanged after the Goods and Services Tax regime kicked off on Saturday. Producers of pickles tomato ketchup , however, complained that GST had raised the taxation level and said sales had slumped after the onset of the new regime, while sellers of branded rice and wheat flour said their distributors had issues with the new system. RS Sodhi, managing director, Amul said implementation of GST had been normal. “We don’t expect any major change in revenue with implementation of GST. The consumer gets to gain. As there was substantial increase in tax for ghee we have increased prices by Rs 25-30 a kg. Cheese, butter and ice cream prices have not been changed as increase was marginal. However, we reduced prices of milk products which came under a lower slab by 5% like dairy whitener, paneer, baby food and cream. ”Nitin Seth, MD at GD Foods, the maker of Tops brand of food products, said there was a slump in demand on the first day with modern retail stores -Kendriya Bhandar, Easy Day and others not doing the billing as systems were being updated for GST, and they were only selling essential commodities with manual billing. "Everyone is trying to understand how things will work. We have not increased retail prices yet. ”Rakesh Jain of Rajdhani Group said they have increased wheat flour (atta) prices by 5%. “Implementation is a challenge as 90% of bulk packing of 50 kg is being sold unbranded. No one (distributor or retailer) is buying as of now. The other challenge is that retailers have not registered for GST," he said. Priyanka Mittal, director at KRBL, which owns India Gate basmati said the company was GST ready. “The shocker is distributors have not placed orders as they expect GST on branded basmati to be reversed from 5% to zero.”
MUMBAI/DELHI: Luxury cars have become a bit more affordable overnight – and Indians have the GST to thank for this windfall. Prices of Mercedes-Benz , BMW, Audi , and JLR would decline up to 10% — or Rs 10 lakh for the fanciest of models — after the historic July 1 midnight adoption of the GST. The luxury car market in 2016-17 saw sales of 35,000 vehicles. Market-leader Mercedes-Benz, BMW and Audi, after the announcement of GST rates in May, decided to pass on the benefits before July 1. On Saturday, Tata Motors-owned Jaguar Land Rover was the first off the block to announce reduced prices in an aggressive advertising run. The benefits are available on models locally assembled. Roland Folger, MD at Mercedes-Benz, said he looks forward to the simplified tax structure creating a single market across India and benefiting the buyer and the seller. “There may be teething issues but we are confident that there will be promising long-term gains. We are encouraged with the rising enquiries and increased footfall at our dealerships, and are confident of continuing with our positive growth momentum,” added Folger. The GST may drive double-digit growth in the luxury-car market, two executives associated with the global carmakers said. Interestingly, the market posted its first ever decline in 2016 because of the ban on diesel vehicles in the National Capital Region, the introduction of infrastructure cess, and the demonetisation in November. Rohit Suri, MD of Jaguar Land Rover brands in India, said the move expands the overall market. The company already lowered JLR prices after the pound declined in the aftermath of Brexit , and cars would become a further 5-7% cheaper after the introduction of the GST. “As prices become more attractive and more people seek to own brands like ours, the market will surely expand. Despite the tough market, we grew by 6%. This year, we expect a double-digit growth. ”Apart from price reduction of 4-9% implemented on car prices, Audi India says there are some attractive offers already available from dealer to dealer. Welcoming the new tax reforms, Rahil Ansari, head of Audi India says hopefully this will be a new and exciting phase for luxury car business in the country. “The new realigned prices offer great opportunity to expand the market and widen our customer base,’ adds Ansari. The luxury car segment still accounts for just 1-1.5% of the overall passenger vehicle market in India. The share is lower than that of even some of the emerging markets of South East Asia, and Brazil. Vikram Pawah, MD at BMW India, says share of luxury cars could rise to 5% of local market, and the automaker would seek to expand market through greater accessibility and better financing options.
NEW DELHI: The goods and services tax regime may have brought some cheer to economy class air travellers but it is unlikely to last long. Experts say that since there is no provision for input tax credit on economy class tickets under GST , the cost of operations for airlines will increase and lead to an increase in fares. While the GST rate on economy class air tickets, at 5%, is about 1 percentage point lower than earlier taxes, it is about 4 percentage points higher for business class tickets, at 12%. Airlines said that the reduced rates on economy class tickets and increased rates on business class tickets will automatically be passed on to consumers. Senior executives said that while airlines would need more time to assess the impact of GST, the industry’s concern cannot be seen as a showstopper for such a big reform. “We will be able to assess the impact on us over a couple of weeks and we expect it would take four to six months for things to sort out,” said SpiceJet chairman Ajay Singh . “The industry is concerned about double taxation on the import of aircraft, a tax on import of aircraft as well as lease rentals, which the government has promised us, will be sorted. ”Abhishek Jain, tax partner at EY said, “There could be a possible dual levy of GST on the import of aircraft on lease basis, that is, a 5% IGST on the import of aircraft and another 5% IGST on payment of lease rentals. ”The industry had represented to the government and was expecting an exemption to avoid the dual levy, but this has not happened, Jain said. “Also for economy class travel, there is a restriction of eligibility of GST credit on the purchase of any goods, which the industry was hoping would be rectified but has not happened yet. ”Singh said the absence of input tax credit on economy class tickets will surely impact the cost of operations of airlines. “Certainly, it will impact (the cost of operations), but these cannot be showstoppers for such a big reform and we are hopeful that it will be resolved by the government,” he said.
NEW DELHI: Mobile phone retail stores have kept their stock at a minimum as they await clarity on pricing of new stock that is expected in the coming week in the wake of new goods and services tax ( GST ) tax regime, which could affect sales for a week or so. Smaller retailers too are wary of issuing bills as many are yet to update systems, though larger ones such as Croma , Reliance Digital and The Mobile Store say the transition has been seamless. End consumer sales have been tepid over this weekend, according to most retailers. Consumers seem to be in wait and watch mode, more so after Apple lowered prices across all its models by up to 7.5% on July 1. Brands such as Samsung, Xiaomi, Oppo ,Gionee, Intex and Lava had previously said they won’t be changing prices even after GST sets in. “We usually don’t keep all models but over the last few days, we have lower than what we typically keep,” said a standalone retailer in south Delhi, while another in east said all models were not available but would be in a few days. A large distributor catering to the north India market, who did not want to be named, said the slow pace of sales at smaller shops will continue for a week or 10 days, as most have yet to do their GST registrations and align their invoicing with it. Since all processes now have to be done online, smaller stores would see an impact on their inventories and supply chain, he explained. Retail chains such as Croma, Reliance Digital, The Mobile Store, however, reported normal sales for this time of year or compared to a regular Saturday, with at most a 5-6% drop in footfalls – mostly attributable to rains. “We had stocked up, so we did not face any issues, sales were also normal,” said Krishna Kumar, CEO at India’s largest mobile handset retail chain The Mobile Store. Handset companies such as Karbonn, Intex, Panasonic, HMD, Micromax and others, though, say they experienced fewer problems than expected as most worked to ensure all internal processes and systems were updated to handle change seamlessly. Rajesh Agarwal, co-founder of Micromax, said internal trainings have ensured its teams are well equipped to handle change and even advice business partners. “Micromax is also helping by organising partner training at state levels to ensure free education for switching the partner businesses to GST from July 1. ”Samsung has set up a crack team including executives from finance, business innovation, production and consultants to help internally and external supply chain, said industry sources. It has trained all distributors and channel partners for transitioning into GST, inventory management, putting technology in for billing and other processes. Samsung did not officially comment. Karbonn Mobiles’ MD Pardeep Jain, though, said the entire trade channel would take time to acquaint with changes. “…as of now, we don’t see any specific challenge”. Intex Technologies chief financial officer Rajeev Jain said its accounts, SAP and EY team were working for the last few months to make the transition without hiccups. HMD Global, which sells the Nokia brand of phones, said it had trained its sales team to communicate with its 400 exclusive distributors.
NEW DELHI: The rollout of the country's most comprehensive indirect tax reform — the goods and services tax — has been positive and largely hassle-free, with no checks on state borders, smooth customs operations and no major problems reported, the government said. Government officials are keeping a close watch on implementation and not taking any chances. "Initial reports are positive… There have not been any hassles," revenue secretary Hasmukh Adhia told ET. The government is now looking at a massive outreach to consumers as well as industry to clarify all issues and highlight the benefits of the tax regime, which came into effect on July 1. "Day two of goods and services tax has passed without major problems being reported," the finance ministry said in a statement on Sunday. "State and central government officers are providing the required information to trade and industry. We have got encouraging reports from roadside dhabas and big restaurants as well as from kirana shops to departmental stores that have started getting acclimatised to the new tax system," the finance ministry statement said. The ministry said 2.23 lakh new dealers have entered the Goods and Services Tax Network system since June 25 by filing draft applications. Of these, 63,000 have also submitted full details and among them, 32,000 dealers have been granted fresh registrations. Adhia himself issued several crucial clarifications through the day on Sunday on certain misconceptions about various provisions of the new tax. The government plans to educate consumers about the comparative incidence on key commodities between GST and the previous tax regime, an official said, adding that it is also keeping an eye on prices. Officials in the ministries concerned are keeping a close tab on implementation. Cabinet secretary PK Sinha reviewed the situation on Sunday with revenue department officials. He has called a meeting with officials of other departments and ministries on Monday to take stock of sector-wise implementation of GST, said the official. Commercial tax check-posts at the borders in many states were dismantled, allowing for free movement of goods. "This commercial tax checkpost has been closed," read a signboard at one such border post. "The feedback is that queues have disappeared," said a government official. In the previous tax regime, trucks had to queue up at borders for hours to pay octroi or some similar entry tax levied by states. All such levies have been subsumed in GST. GST combines 17 state and central taxes besides 23 cesses into one levy to create a seamless national market in the country. The customs department, which began collecting Integrated GST along with filing of bill of entry and shipping, has seen smooth operations, two senior officials said. Software issues cropping up due to the change in entries with GST were immediately addressed as offices remained open. There was only a one-hour, late evening closure to update the software. "Cargo movement has been smooth," one of the officials said. There are no reports of shortage of supplies of essential commodities and medicines from anywhere in the country, officials and experts said. The Confederation of All India Traders, a key association of traders across the country, said business activities remained normal and smooth with footfalls of customers in commercial markets and shopping complexes remaining normal. Tax experts agreed that the implementation of GST has been largely without hiccups. "The rollout has been broadly smooth… No shortage of supplies," said Bipin Sapra, a partner at EY, while pitching for sectoral guidance to further help industry. "It's good to see there have not been any major disruptions in business. The government’s massive outreach programme in the past few months seems to be paying off now," said Pratik Jain, leader, indirect tax, at PwC, also adding that the government must quickly come out with sector-specific guidance for which groups were formed. The industry wants to see the first set of filings before giving the new tax a thumbs up. "The acid test of the systems would be from September 10 onwards when the filing starts and the Goods and Services Tax Network will provide us our purchase registers," said CAIT national secretary-general Praveen Khandelwal. Khandelwal also sought expeditious resolution of GST in Jammu & Kashmir, the only state that has remained outside the ambit of the new regime. He said this was hurting not only the trade but also consumers in the state.
NEW DELHI: Car buyers would likely be the most enthusiastic backers of the GST , the new levy that has led Indian automakers to immediately slash prices substantially across consumer segments. Maruti Suzuki and Hero Moto-Corp, leaders in the country’s fourwheeled and two-wheeled vehicle markets, were the first to drop prices after the July 1midnight adoption of GST. Hyundai Motor India, Tata Motors, and Ford India – manufacturers that compete with Maruti locally – are likely to follow suit with cuts in the next few days. For the Maruti Suzuki’s range of vehicles, prices declined between Rs 2,300 and Rs 23,400 a unit. The range was wider at Toyota’s Indian unit, which slashed vehicle prices between Rs 10,500 and Rs 217,000 apiece. Hero MotoCorp’s prices declined between Rs 400 and Rs 4,000. “We are hopeful that the price decrease after GST will further boost customer demand in the coming months,” said N Raja, director and senior vice-president for marketing and sales at Toyota Kirloskar Motor. “The GST will be fruitful for the growth of the auto industry. The industry will break into double digit growth territory this year. ”Maruti said prices have been revised such that the entire benefit of GST rates is passed on to customers. The company has reduced ex-showroom prices by up to 3%. The rate of reduction varies across locations, depending on the VAT rates applicable prior to GST. The ex-showroom prices of small car Alto in Bengaluru have declined by up to Rs 5,400, WagonR by up to Rs 8,300, Swift by up to Rs 10,700, DZire by up to Rs 15,100, Ertiga (petrol) by up to Rs 21,800, Ciaz (petrol) by up to Rs 23,400, Vitara Brezza by up to Rs 14,700 and S Cross by up to Rs 21,300. Bengaluru has been taken as a representative city as VAT of 14.5% here is matched with the rate in most places in the country. Due to the withdrawal of tax concessions on mild hybrid vehicles, the prices of Smart Hybrid Ciaz Diesel and Smart Hybrid Ertiga Diesel have increased. Toyota has revised prices by up to 13%. The price decrease in Bengaluru for Innova Crysta will be up to Rs 98,500, Fortuner up to Rs 217,000, Corolla Altis upto Rs 92,500, Etios Liva up to Rs 10500. Hero MotoCorp also said the company is passing on the benefit of GST to its customers with a reduction in the prices of models.
BENGALURU: Prime Minister Narendra Modi hailed GST as a “good and simple tax” that will end harassment of small businesses. However, reality remains quite different. Experts and economists have said GST will be beneficial in the long run but small businessmen are unclear about nuts and bolts. Requesting anonymity, a central excise, and customs official said the main problem is that there is no concept of issuing a tax invoice in tier II cities which has now been mandated if the sale value is above Rs 200. “This is bound to create an initial hiccup for small businesses”. He added that without strong IT infrastructure, these businessmen are now hapless, looking for IT skills. However, they will become more transparent later, he said. Archit Gupta, founder of Cleartax, says they see over 50% traffic from metro cities while tier II and III cities constitute around 46% who seek help for e-filing of tax. “Right now, individuals are not clear about the rates and are querying about IGST, CGST etc. Surprisingly many restaurants and others are charging GST differently. There is a lot of confusion about the invoicing and compliance which will take time. Few are yet to understand meanings of CGST and IGST. Many websites were down and businesses were halted so as to get clarity on the situation”. He adds that overall it should take around 100 days for businesses to completely embrace GST. “Tier II and III cities will take longer to implement because even though they are aware, implementation will be a major challenge. ”Lucknow-basedMudit Kaushik, owner of three Sharma Departmental Stores, told ET, “There is a lot of confusion regarding the final tax rates of different products that we sell. Many companies sell multiple products to us which will invite different tax rates but I still have no clarity on the entire situation. ”He adds, “Many businessmen here have not yet registered for GSTN till now. ”Customers are even being given handwritten bills as shopkeepers are uncertain as what to charge the customers. A 59-year old manufacturer said sales had been halted due to invoicing and compliance ambiguity. ”Our traders who mostly deal in cash, are still hesitant to confirm any deals yet.”
MUMBAI|NEW DELHI|KOLKATA: On Sunday, day II of the GST regime, Yash Communications, a small mobile phone recharge shop in SakiNaka, Mumbai, had to pacify around 10 customers who had braved the rains to recharge their phones. Their recharges ranged from Rs 10 to Rs 200, but things got muddled when one person got Rs 7 worth of talktime for a recharge of Rs 10, while another got Rs 6 for the same recharge cost. “Even a rupee counts in India, and I couldn’t explain why the taxes were different for the same company’s recharge. I could not tell the customer because distributors had not told us what the changes will be,” said Rajesh Pratap, owner of Yash Communications. He expects better clarity from Monday. Pratap also couldn’t recharge for Tata Docomo customers as lines were jammed. The story was pretty much the same across the country over the weekend. While post-paid users aren’t facing any problems since their bills will factor in 18% GST instead of the 15% service tax earlier, pre-paid users, especially those who use lower value, are a confused lot. Recharge shop owners said they haven't got sheets detailing all the plans, which show the amount people will get for a certain recharge value, but they're going ahead with rates that existed before GST. There were complaints of jammed servers because of which recharge coupons could not be uploaded. Emails to Airtel, Vodafone, Idea, Reliance Jio, Reliance Communications, Tata Teleservices and Aircel remained unanswered till the time of going to press. “All policy changes of this size are bound to face teething problems. As long as the government and Industry work together for the greater good, we are certain that all issues will get resolved,” said Rajan S.Mathews, director general, Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI), which represents the likes of Airtel, Vodafone, Idea and Jio. Many across cities did not get their phones recharged due to the tariff confusion, especially at the mom-and-pop outlets, but the larger operator-owned stores said it was business as usual. Some of the stores in Delhi, anticipating this confusion, had shut shop over the weekend. In South Delhi, for instance, most of the recharge stores were closed over the weekend, and a few that stayed open, said they would not recharge till the second half of the day as their systems were getting updated. Mrinal Ghosh, who has been doing mobile recharges and electronic top-ups for over a decade in Kolkata, said electronic top-ups were not happening for most vendors on Sunday morning as telcos were still reconfiguring IT and billing systems. But it wasn’t all downhill though. Astore in Mumbai, owned by a top telco, said they had been given the pricing charts and had no issues with customers. The store, located at a busy junction, said if there was any low turnout, it was because of the rains and not the new taxes.
Watching the proceedings in the central hall of the Parliament last night, one couldn’t help but feel the significance of the moment. We saw history in the making, no doubt, and a strong signal to the world that Indian reforms are well on their way. A transformation of this scale and scope is undoubtedly complex and will also be accompanied by issues arising from some sectors being overlooked and potentially causing unintended collateral damage. One such area that we will have to closely evaluate is the impact of the new GST regime on the used car industry and therefore on the new car industry. At 3.3 million vehicles, the used car industry in India is now larger than the new car industry by way of volume and plays a significant and critical role in enabling the new car industry. In our estimate, 27 per cent of all new car sales to consumers are enabled by an exchange of their prior vehicle. It also plays a fundamental role in satisfying masses of young aspiring families striving to buy their first set of wheels. Over half the buyers of used cars are first time buyers. Furthermore, the industry is only now getting organized on the back of brands that are working on providing a high level of trust and confidence to consumers venturing to buy their first (used) car with proper process, experience and paperwork. The used car retail industry fundamentally differs from the new car industry in its being primarily a "trading" play. Wholesale trades (from one dealer to another or dealer to consumer) require high liquidity in wholesale markets to allow an exchanged (or other) used car to flow through distribution channels and ultimately into the hands of a new owner. Value added in each transaction itself is relatively low, but as described above, the value provided by these channels to the automotive industry overall is enormous. In essence, the used car industry is a critical part of the automotive ecosystem and has to be dealt with as a major sector of utmost importance. However, for taxation purposes cannot be treated like the new car industry which is manufacturer driven. In the GST environment, as it stands on July 1, the GST rate structure has been aligned with the new car rates, presumably under a broad umbrella of "car sales". However, as we just described above, the used vehicle industry relies heavily on these cars being traded via wholesale channels to allow the vehicle to find its new owner. This vehicle may go through one or several wholesale transactions before it is retailed to a new consumer, and these wholesale transactions are extremely important to provide "inventory liquidity" to the used car marketplace. The idea of a uniform GST rate pan-India is welcome and urgently needed. The rate structure pre-GST was highly variable from state to state. For example, Maharashtra had a VAT of 1.875 per cent of the sale value and Andhra Pradesh/Telangana had a VAT of 14 per cent on the differential between selling and buying price. When one looks at the country overall, the average VAT rate (pre-GST) worked out to be in the neighbourhood of 5 per cent-6 per cent on the differential between selling and buying price. Costs incurred by the dealer to refurbish and transport the vehicle for example are in addition to the taxes that have to be paid out of the gross margin. However, with a base GST rate of 28 per cent and accompanied cess, we are now looking at tax rates of 28 per cent to 43 per cent on the gross margin generated, probably the highest in the world for used car transactions. This rate would make it four to five times the existing national average and twice the maximum existing VAT (which was very high). Generally speaking, If a used car dealer sells 5-6 vehicles a month at an average price of Rs.2.5 Lakhs each, generating 10 per cent gross margin, a tax rate of 28 per cent on the margin (Rs.7,000) will fundamentally make his business unviable and challenge his very livelihood. Implications of such a high rate can be two-fold: 1) Supress exchange penetration and raise the prices of used vehicles thereby supressing demand for cars overall 2) Drive transactions to the unorganized sector wherein sellers and buyers might resort to "jugaad" to get around the taxation. The GST rate therefore needs to be urgently re-visited and reduced to be more inline with prevailing equivalent VAT rates across the country which are in the neighbourhood of 5 per cent-6 per cent of the differential between selling and buying price (gross margin in other words). As leaders of the organized used vehicle sector, we at Mahindra First Choice Wheels are keen to see rapid and high adoption of a reasonable GST regime that will allow dealers to buy and sell vehicles in a transparent, trusted manner and ultimately satisfy a billion aspirations of car ownership. An appeal to the GST Council – we hope the GST rates can be modified to reasonable levels and implemented as quickly as possible.
