MUMBAI|NEW DELHI: India’s car industry has already emerged as the GST’s standard-bearer, and is likely to log record primary sales of 3 lakh units in July after the introduction of the single producer levy. Carmakers are set to eclipse the March 2012 Indian record of 2.95 lakh units, paced by replenishment demand from empty dealerships and significant price reductions brought about by the GST. Most dealers had sold out their inventory in the run-up to the introduction of the levy. June dispatches are estimated to have seen a decline of about 15 per cent ahead of the introduction of the biggest tax reform since Independence. July would witness a strong rebound, helping recover the lost sales. According to industry estimates, July may see dispatches of 2.9-3 lakh units: In July 2016, primary sales were 2.59 lakh units. Market leader Maruti Suzuki has plans of producing 1.59 lakh units for the month of July, which is 16 per cent higher over the previous July. Almost 90-92 per cent of the output is likely to be for the domestic market. Japan's largest car maker Toyota has already accounted for a 12 per cent growth in July, having sold most of its inventory in June. Consumer offers and assurance of price cuts drove June retail sales to about 2.7-2.8 lakh units. While the attractive offers ensured that June sales would remain unaffected, carmakers say sentiment is only improving now as the monsoon spreads far and wide. Both Maruti Suzuki and Toyota were quick to pass on the GST price benefit to consumers Saturday. Maruti announced a 3 per cent price reduction across models, whereas Toyota Kirloskar has already reduced prices by Rs 10,500 to Rs 217,000 across its portfolio. On Monday, Honda Cars India reduced prices across its range of vehicles by up to Rs 131,663 and Ford India too slashed prices by 4.5 per cent across the portfolio. Jnaneswar Sen, senior vice president, sales and marketing at Honda Cars, says June witnessed strong sales, and July could be better. According to the apex industry body, Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), monthly passenger vehicle sales touched a record high of 2.95 lakh units in March of 2012, and the second highest was 2.82 lakh units this March. Veejay Nakra, senior vice-president, sales and marketing, automotive division at Mahindra & Mahindra, says that besides adjustment of stock for retail and wholesale, the sentiment in the market is expected to improve further. “With most of the stock liquidated in June, July will see a higher offtake. However, what is heartening is that the sentiment is improving further, led by strong monsoon. We are gearing up for a very strong festive season for the industry”. Maruti Suzuki, which had a weeklong scheduled maintenance shutdown at its facilities in June, has resumed full-fledged production, which has had a direct impact on the overall output for the market. A senior executive at Toyota Kirloskar Motor (TKM) said that Toyota only shipped vehicles to dealers upon orders in June. The focus was on liquidating the existing inventory so that losses are not incurred due to lack of input tax credit on central sales tax, infra cess and national calamity contingent duty. And these three components amounted to around 6 per cent of the vehicle cost at Toyota. “With prices coming down post GST, we expect the industry to break into double-digit growth territory,” added the executive.
NEW DELHI: As many as 22 states have abolished border commercial tax checkposts after the rollout of goods and services tax ( GST ) on July 1, marking a big step towards ‘One nation, one tax’ goal of this reform. These states include both NDA-ruled ones and those by the opposition, indicating a broad-based intent to implement the GST. The states include Gujarat, Bihar, Karnataka, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand. Eight states including Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab, Mizoram and Tripura are in the process of abolishing their checkposts , an official statement said on Monday. “The Goods and Services Tax (GST) was rolled out on 1st of July 2017. With the rollout of the GST, 22 states in India have abolished their checkposts,” the statement said. Many states have also issued advisories to field to not stop trucks. The abolition of checkposts will allow seamless movement of goods across the border, ending hours of waiting commercial vehicles had to endure at state boundaries. Seamless transport is expected to cut transport costs, which will help make goods cheaper. In India, goods are largely transported by the most costly mode, roads, and the state boundaries escalated that costs. Border checking is primarily for tax compliance issues and also scrutiny of materials. This causes delay and also has been identified as major source of pollution as trucks idle for hours. According to a PhillipCapital study, logistics account for 14% of GDP in India compared to 8.5% for US. In the GST regime, Electronic Way Bills, also called E-way Bills will be the primary document for transportation of the goods. Any movement of goods worth over `50,000 can be done only after online registration of the consignment to secure an 'e-way bill' that tax officials can inspect anytime during the transit to check tax evasion. “There are some messages going around in the social media stating that the temple trusts have to pay the GST while the churches and mosques are exempt,” a finance ministry statement said. This is completely untrue because no distinction is made in the GST Law on any provision based on religion, it said.
MUMBAI: Stocks surged on Monday as price cuts by companies and tax concessions for ITC under the Goods and Services Tax ( GST ) lifted investor sentiment despite uncertainty over the near-term impact of the countrywide, unified tax system. The Sensex reclaimed the 31,000 mark and the Nifty jumped past 9,600 with ITC, the index heavyweight, contributing 50% of overall gains. The stock, which has the second-highest weightage on the Nifty, rose 9% to hit a record of Rs 353.20 after the government clarified that cigarettes would be exempted from the additional excise duty under GST. ITC ended 5.7% higher at Rs 342.30 after crossing Rs 4 lakh crore in market cap. The Sensex rose for the third straight day to end 300 points higher at 31,221.62 while the Nifty rose 94 points to 9,615. The India volatility index (VIX) slumped 4.5% to 11.2 after rising for two days. The BSE FMCG index rose 3.4% and auto stocks like Maruti Suzuki and Hero Moto-Corp also did well, buoyed by hopes of volume demand after price cuts. Hero MotoCorp gained 2.2% and Maruti Suzuki rose 2%. Both companies had cut prices of cars and two-wheelers. GST, which was inaugurated Friday midnight, is expected to shift demand from unorganised to organised sector, boosting stocks such as Colgate, Pidilite Industries, Century Plyboard and UltraTech Cement. Some of these stocks are expected to gain from price cuts as well as the impending shift in demand. "The market is not going to fall because of GST. There will be hiccups but it is a brilliant piece of legislation which will improve ease of doing business," said Raamdeo Agrawal, joint managing director at Motilal Oswal Financial Services. Derivative experts said that the market seems to have given a 'buy' signal for now. The almost 100-point rally on Nifty saw significant buying of the 9,600 call, whose price per share (75 shares equal one contract) rose a whopping 65%. A trader buys a call option when he feels that an asset, stocks in this case, will rise. The rise was coupled with a jump in open positions – 11,475 contracts were added during Monday's rally (from Friday close) taking total open positions to 44,391 contracts – showing a bullish trend, at least for now. Adding to the optimism was heavy selling of the 9,600 put option on Monday. A put option seller is bullish on markets, while a buyer is bearish on markets. The fact that the sellers dominated the 9,600 put counter is borne by the fact that as its price tanked by 41% a share, more open positions were added (16,560 contracts). If put sellers were unsure on the uptrend continuing, they would have booked profits and not added fresh positions. Based on the average price of the 9,600 call and put on Monday, the resistance for the Nifty is 9,696.25 while the support is at 9,497.86. Also, 9,500 call sellers (who are bearish markets) covered their shorts, pushing up the price per share of that strike by 55%. Technical analysts see the Nifty gaining further in the short term. "The trend remains positive. We may see 9,750-9,800 coming in the July series itself and we would advise utilising any correction as an opportunity to buy," said Sahaj Agarwal, AVP-derivatives at Kotak Securities. In June, Nifty had touched a record high of 9709.30 on June 5 and the Sensex had touched a lifetime high of 31522.87 on June 22. The relatively lower, 0.27% jump in the Bank Nifty – banks have a 23.12% weightage in Nifty – suggests that for the rally to sustain, banks must participate in equal measure. Non-participation of banks in a market rally could raise doubts about its sustainability. Independent derivatives analyst Hormuz Maloo added that a "clearer" picture on the trend would emerge on Tuesday. Ahead of GST, nervousness in the market had led to the volatility gauge rising sharply. Concern over high valuation and worries that the easy money policy era of central banks may come to an end had also contributed to the market nervousness in June. Benchmark indices -- Sensex and Nifty -- last month posted their first monthly loss since November. Cash market volume fell 11.6% from the previous month to Rs 27,291crore during the month. Vaibhav Sanghavi, co-chief executive officer at Avendus Capital Alternate Strategies, said the market is discounting any disruptive impact of GST as it is known that it will be a short-term phenomenon. "The momentum is strong but we are in neutral mode now and we will take a call on the market once we have more information about the effect GST will have on the numbers of companies," said Sanghavi.
NEW DELHI: Three days into the goods and services tax regime, the government has asked all departments to take responsibility for implementing GST in their sectors, and ensure that there is no shortage of products and the benefits are shared with consumers. Cabinet secretary PK Sinha on Monday reviewed implementation of the new indirect tax regime with secretaries and senior officials of various ministries and departments, including textiles, food and consumer affairs, food processing, railways, MSME, rural development, tourism, fertilisers, pharmaceuticals, and financial services. The review was focused on consumer impact of GST that rolled out on July 1. Sinha asked every secretary to take up the responsibility of their own stakeholders, trade and industry and with state officers as far as implementation of GST is concerned. The government has also asked all departments to ensure that there is no shortage of products and consumer items to keep a check on prices. Special emphasis was laid on keeping prices of essential commodities under check. Each ministry has to provide all the relevant information, including GST rates, on their respective websites. Sinha asked department concerned to ensure that retailers, dealers/shopkeepers should display a ready price list under GST of items sold by them.
BENGALURU: Thousands of online merchants not yet compliant with the new sales tax have been barred temporarily by marketplaces from selling on their platforms. But several are also opting out because of a seeming lack of commercial viability under the new rules. Online marketplaces such as Flipkart and Amazon India have made it mandatory for their merchants to register on their platforms with their new Goods and Services Tax Identification Numbers ( GSTIN ) by July 1, as the new tax became effective. But several vendors haven’t been able to obtain GSTINs yet for various reasons. While this could reduce availability of products in certain categories, online marketplaces insist overall sales would not be affected. “We don’t foresee any impact on sales. Some of the selection may get lost… (but) due to tax being lowered in many categories like fashion, we expect the sellers to pass the benefits to our customers,” Flipkart said in an email to ET. “Close to 95 per cent of our sellers who contribute to our sales have become GST-compliant. The rest are in the process of obtaining GSTINs from the government as in certain states there is a delay in getting the same,” the company said. Flipkart had about 100,000 sellers on its platform. Paytm Mall chief operating officer Amit Sinha said more than 80 per cent of the sellers on the platform had submitted their GSTINs, and Snapdeal said 92 per cent of its top sellers had registered their new tax identification numbers with it. Amazon India did not disclose how many of the vendors on its platform had registered their GSTINs with it, only saying: “We believe GST is good for the ecommerce industry as it would eliminate hurdles in inter-state delivery and subsume the entry tax introduced on ecommerce shipments by some states. ”That said, according to the All India Online Vendors Association, several merchants do not want to continue selling online in the next tax regime. “Some of the categories will have to be marked up on price due to GST. Those sellers have chosen not to go ahead (and register). However, the GST rollout has been smooth,” said a spokesperson for the association, which represents about 2,000 online sellers.
NEW DELHI: The renewable energy sector is quite content with GST provisions. Contrary to earlier fears of sale of solar equipment – panels, modules and inverters – being taxed at high rates, the GST on such sales has been set at 5 per cent. “The net effect on solar projects will be 3.5-4.5 per cent,” said Raj Prabhu, co-founder and CEO of Mercom Capital Group, which tracks the segment. “There will be issues with power purchase agreements as they will vary from state to state but 5 per cent GST is much more palatable than the expected 18 per cent. ”The only worry is that for very small installations of 100 kw in residential sector solar inverters used will invite 28 per cent GST. Similarly, in wind segment, sale of turbines and other equipment will attract GST of 5 per cent, the same as VAT did earlier. However, most wind equipment manufacturers also take on the task of setting up projects for developers, and this being a service, will attract 18 per cent GST, up from 12 per cent tax on engineering services earlier. “All engineering services are currently in 18 per cent bracket,” said D V Giri, secretary general, Indian Wind Turbine Manufacturers Association. “We have asked for the entire gamut to be brought into 5 per cent slab. ”Solar projects involving civil and works contracts will be taxed at 18 per cent. “There will be an increase in solar tariffs to which key contributors will be operation and maintenance, component costs and civil, works contracts,” said Prabhu.
Goods & Services Tax 2 Jul, 2017 Goods and services tax (GST) has become a reality from July 1. There are expectations that the tax reform will boost the Indian economy and huge shift will be seen from unorganised to organised sector. However, some near term hiccups can be seen for the next one or two quarters. According to market experts, job creation will remain a concern as the unorganised sector shifts towards the organized sector. In the coming slides, ETMarkets.com looks at the various sectors and likely impact of GST on them. Goods and services tax (GST) has become a reality from July 1. There are expectations that the tax reform will boost the Indian economy and huge shift will be seen from unorganised to organised sector. However, some near term hiccups can be seen for the next one or two quarters. According to market experts, job creation will remain a concern as the unorganised sector shifts towards the organized sector. In the coming slides, ETMarkets.com looks at the various sectors and likely impact of GST on them.
FMCG 2 Jul, 2017 Fast moving consumer goods sector will benefit from the GST due to the present of big unorganised market. GST rate for products like hair oil, soaps and toothpaste has been lowered by 500-600 bps from the previous rates. Companies such as Colgate-Palmolive, HUL, Britannia, Heritage Foods etc will benefit from the move. Fast moving consumer goods sector will benefit from the GST due to the present of big unorganised market. GST rate for products like hair oil, soaps and toothpaste has been lowered by 500-600 bps from the previous rates. Companies such as Colgate-Palmolive, HUL, Britannia, Heritage Foods etc will benefit from the move.
Pharma and healthcare 2 Jul, 2017 Pharmaceutical products will see 12 per cent GST as against earlier rate of 10 per cent. Angel Broking believes companies will be able to pass on this full impact to the patients. The healthcare sector will remain exempt from the GST however the inputs by the healthcare sector will be taxed at 18 per cent leading to rise in the operating costs. Companies like Dr Lal Pathlabs will benefit. Pharmaceutical products will see 12 per cent GST as against earlier rate of 10 per cent. Angel Broking believes companies will be able to pass on this full impact to the patients. The healthcare sector will remain exempt from the GST however the inputs by the healthcare sector will be taxed at 18 per cent leading to rise in the operating costs. Companies like Dr Lal Pathlabs will benefit.
Consumer durables 2 Jul, 2017 White good players were previously taxed at 27 per cent (including 13.5 per cent VAT) against 28 per cent under the new GST regime. There are expectations that with GST coming in picture, there will be some increase in the prices of most consumer durable items. However, market analysts do not see any significant impact on the margins of the consumer durable companies post GST implementation. One should keep an eye on companies like Crompton Greaves, Symphony, Whirlpool, Havells and Voltas. White good players were previously taxed at 27 per cent (including 13.5 per cent VAT) against 28 per cent under the new GST regime. There are expectations that with GST coming in picture, there will be some increase in the prices of most consumer durable items. However, market analysts do not see any significant impact on the margins of the consumer durable companies post GST implementation. One should keep an eye on companies like Crompton Greaves, Symphony, Whirlpool, Havells and Voltas.
In an exclusive interview with ET NOW’s Tanvir Gill and Ayesha Faridi, Rakesh Jhunjhunwala , Partner, Rare Enterprises, says that the biggest gain from GST is a digitised economy, along with efficiencies in logistics leading to efficient supply chains. Though there will be initial hiccups, the changes that the new tax regime will unleash will lead to a ‘forced morality and a willingness to pay taxes’, he said. The anti-profiteering clause is of little use as competition places a better check on prices, he said. The ace investor also felt that once a few stressed assets in the banking sector are resolved under the new bankruptcy code, it would take around 18-24 months to tackle the NPA mountain. Edited excerpts:Let us not be burdened with India’s perception, let us be burdened with the reality. The effect of GST is going to be far deeper than the tax itself, because first it will lead to digitisation. Anybody who has a business with a turnover of more than `20 lakh will have to digitalise their business and that is going to bring in tremendous efficiency in the way we work. Second, it is going to lead to big logistical gains because companies had to maintain warehouses in each state as they did not want to pay the central sales tax, and lorries were stopped in lots of places. Thirdly, the rates are not going to lead to any increase in taxation. Overall, there is going to be some reduction in taxes and not some increase. People are anyway going to cry, it is difficult, everybody likes the status quo. I only feel sorry that it took 15 years to pass (GST) and implement a law which we all felt we needed. Every political party essentially supported it. I am not saying better late than never, but I am saying as a country, as a society, as a democracy we should examine why this reform took 15 years. The market acts like a woman, very difficult to fathom. The market has paused because people are very apprehensive. So what about inflation? It is at 2.5%. It is below RBI’s target. We are sitting on a good monsoon, we are sitting on low oil prices; I do not know where inflation is going to come from. They say markets climb a wall of worry. When I see so much worry around, I feel refreshed. We live in a competitive society. If there are five manufacturers and two pass it on, the other three will also have to pass it on. What I do not agree is what you mean by tax. I am giving an inclusive price to the customers with tax. If I was slated for a price increase in June and the taxes come down, I do not take the price increase. I do not agree that you can determine the price by tax alone. Tax is one of the elements of price. Therefore, every industry will decide whether they will be able to pass it on and in a situation where there is no inflation, where there is spare capacity, everybody wants volumes. I do not think the anti-profiteering is going to lead to anything. Just like I felt at the time of demonetisation, I said are you going to stop eating? Are you going to stop watching movies? Are you going to stop going to restaurants? Are people going to stop buying cars? So there may be a very transitory effect. For the customer, nothing has changed except some kind of apprehension. Prices go up, prices go down. You give me one reason why demand should be affected. I know of companies who have planned for the transition. For the consumption point of view, you look at the consumer, how is he affected. If things become expensive, you will go for the cheaper models. It is as simple as that. In certain items, the rate of tax has increased but effective tax rate has decreased because the input credits are greater than the increase in the rate. Every industry can price itself at whatever prices they want and I do not think that the unorganised sector is going to be hit as badly as people think, because you think say there is 12% VAT on pipes, now we feel that the unorganised fellow is not paying any VAT and therefore he is avoiding the entire 12%. But the matter of the fact is that 80% of his cost is plastic on which he gets a VAT. He gets input credit. So actually what he is evading is 2.4%. When people tell you that there is 12% tax they are evading, do not believe them because that is without the input credit. Even if the SME person starts paying tax, he will also get the input credit. That is the CA Rakesh Jhunjhunwala. He has done all his maths...A large perception is that with GST coming in, the organised sector will get their much awaited opportunity of getting into the unorganised sector and expanding there...There are two things. The taxes that were being avoided or evaded, it is not that the benefit of that was coming to the manufacturer. It was being passed on to the consumers. Partly, the prices of the unorganised sector will also have to rise but it is not in terms of 12% excise duty and the organised sector was paying it. All this hype that they are going to get benefits is going to let a lot of people come into the income tax bracket. Movement of goods throughout India for every manufacturer will be free. What changes for the consumer? Today if I go buy a pen, even if I do not take a bill he charges me excise. I take a bill, he is going to charge me tax. What difference does it make to me? For the consumer nothing has changed. It is only in the supply chain. So why this hype? Initially there is going to be difficulty. Whenever any change comes we find it hard to adjust to it. I remember 1991 reforms. People said, the steel industry will close down, everything in India will close down and it ended up being more efficient. The development will lead to forced morality and willingness to pay taxes. The cost of evasion will become much higher than the cost of paying it. Absolutely. The more Indians come into the tax net, more reasonable will the rates be. Let me not guess, everybody is guessing, nobody knows. There are some predictions that it will go up by 8%, some predict it will go up by 20 bps. I think there will be gains but I do not think the gain is going to be big. It is going to take time. Digitisation itself will lead to efficiencies, movement of goods, exports, better logistical movements. To quantify that gain today is difficult. There are going to be as many intangible gains as there are going to be tangible gains. I personally feel India is poised for double-digit growth, GST is an aid to it, even without GST we would have reached there. If you ask my personal judgment, post 2019-2020 we are poised for double digit growth. See, the tackling of the NPA is a journey and it is not a destination. I personally feel in the next 18 months, it will be tackled. Businessmen and banks will understand that prolonging things is not going to help. It will lead to more responsible lending and borrowing. Yes, that feeling was there for the last two years. Let us get down to business. But the question is how do we get down to business. Suppose they get the top 30 accounts and 50% of the NPAs. It is a substantial movement and the moment two, three assets are resolved either by restructuring or by auction and if you set fair and easy fair terms you will have lots of bidders not only from India but from abroad also coming up. This process jo 14 saal ka banwas tha...(what was 14 years in the wilderness) will still take 18 to 24 months and the benefits and the costs will vary from bank to bank. Private banking is already a winner. Yes, but I think the private sector banks are much better provided for. The returns on assets of public sector banks without the credit cost is very low. Private sector banks are far more efficient.
NEW DELHI/MUMBAI: If you did not purchase that television or appliance last week when retailers were selling these big ticket items at a steep discount, you will now have to shell out more as manufacturers have begun raising prices to account for GST. Dealers said LG is the first among consumer durable makers to hike television (TV) prices. From LG LED televisions, LG Smart LED sets to LG UHD LED sets, dealer prices have increased in the range of 1.3 to 7% in the western region. In Delhi/NCR region, prices have gone up marginally by under 2%. Confirming the development, Vijay Sales, managing partner, Nilesh Gupta, said: "LG has set the trend for price increases. This is on expected lines. "Panasonic, too, said prices of TVs and white goods such as refrigerators and microwave ovens will go up soon. "The quantum is still being worked out and will be finalized by the end of this week," Ajay Seth, Director of Sales & Service at Panasonic India, said. Sources said the impact can be between 3-4% on the existing retail prices. Samsung, on the other hand, said prices are not being increased immediately. However, industry and trade sources said the Korean electronics maker had increased the prices of white goods by 1-2% before the announcement of GST. An official of Sony India said that there are no plans to increase the price of panel TVs. "While we are still studying the implications of GST. We have no intention to revise prices of TVs as of now," said Satish Padmanabhan, Head of Sales of Sony India. HP too has taken price hikes on HP Notebook and HP Pavilion Notebook by around 2%, according to Vijay Sales. An official at Lenovo said that the company is looking into the GST rates and its impact on the cost. "The evaluation is still on, but we have not firmed up anything on this. We may not increase the prices if there is not much impact," the official said. In the pre-GST sale across stores last week, consumer appliances and durables were being sold at up to 50% discount to consumers. As a result, footfalls across these stores were up by nearly 70%. Consumer durables have come under the 28% tax slab of GST from July 1, this year. This is higher as compared to the earlier tax range of 24-28%.
