MUMBAI: Abolition of octroi could result in saving of more than Rs 2000 crore and cut down freight time for trucks and commercial vehicles by at least 25%. As many as 22 states have abolished their check posts since July 1 with the advent of GST. Tax rate on transport services has been increased to 5% from 4.5%, which will be borne by the buyer or seller of the goods whoever is availing the freight services; the latter can then lower final tax liability by claiming input credit. Also, a GST notification exempting registration of some of the associated entities would save transporters from a lot of paper work. "On an average we spent three hours waiting at the check posts and there was a lot of harassment. In addition, if there are any minor issues with the documents, there was delay of another 3 to 4 hours. And irrespective of whether the documents are in order or not, there was always some bribe to be paid to officials," Said Anil Vijan of G Shantilal Transport Company who operates a fleet of 80 trucks in the southern states. According to him, covering the distance from Mumbai to Bangalore, along with loading/unloading of cargo, should not take more than 18 to 20 hours, but all trucks had to wait for an extra 6 to 10 hours at the two check posts on the route. Surjeet Singh Chawla of Chawla Road Lines who operates a fleet of 35 trucks on the Mumbai-Kolkata route had to deal with five check posts. "We expect to save one full day now," said Chawla. According to industry circles, bribes at each check post was anything between Rs 200 and Rs 1000 per vehicle; the average time wasted was around 5 to 7 hours. Bribes added 3% to the total cost; delays stretched the travel time by 25-40%. "Post GST, overall direct savings estimated for the operators is close to Rs 2000 crore which could lead to significant improvement in the return on assets ratio for ground transportation companies," said Sandeep Upadhyay, senior vice president, Infrastructure Solutions group, Centrum Capital. In the listed space, companies such as VRL Logistics, Gati and TCI are the major players in the segment. When contacted, VRL and Gati officials said that the development was a big positive but refrained from spelling out the gains. Spokesperson for Bombay Goods Transport Association (BGTA), too said that the savings for the industry would be substantial and the state government too would save upto Rs 2000 crore. Typically, a driver of a commercial vehicle putting in 12 to 13 hours a day covers at least 350-375 km. Long hours and hurdles on the way often made certain routes unviable for many fleet operators. As a result operators chose to limit services to specific routes. Businessmen like Nilesh Rajpopat, owner of the Mumbai based Noble Industries which makes metal pipes, is exploring the possibility of tapping markets in other states. Thanks to discrepancy and complications related to various state taxes, till now he only dealt with buyers of a handful of states. If more like him reach out to buyers in other states, demand for transportation services is expected to rise. Rajpopat felt some of the railway freight traffic could move to roads.
MUMBAI: The Goods and Services Tax (GST) may have made banking services more expensive, but lenders believe the single producer levy creating a common market across India would boost credit growth With detailed information on taxes and businesses now available in an electronic format, bankers believe SME and self-employed portfolio may see faster credit expansion. These are traditionally the segments banks have shied away from. However, they believe once they have one full cycle of data, credit growth in these segments will accelerate by FY19. “What GST will provide us is that for many of these smaller companies, we will have data: So, our ability to understand these businesses, and therefore, lend to them will improve dramatically,” said Rajiv Anand, ED, Axis bank. “We tend to underestimate the ability of businesses to change as circumstances change and many of these businesses will change, given the fact that it has become much more expensive to do business in cash. ”According to central bank data, growth in loans to individuals increased 13.7% y-o-y in May, compared to 19.1% in the same month of 2016. Retail loans have risen in the mid-to-late teens after hitting a bottom of 11% witnessed after demonetisation. Credit to the industry continued to fall for eighth straight month in May, and increased a little over 2%. Loans to micro and small industries were the biggest disappointment, which just managed to report a 0.1% growth. India ushered in the GST on July 1that promises a unifying tax and replaces a multitude of taxes, including central taxes such as service tax and excise duties, and state taxes, such as octroi, entry tax, VAT and so on. In case of the banking industry, while service tax was applicable on almost all banking services, now it is going to be absorbed in the GST: Hence, the rate of the levy has gone up from 15% to 18%.
NEW DELHI: The government has allowed exporters to furnish bond or letter of undertaking manually to facilitate exports post rollout of goods and services tax GST ). The government has issued a clarification after the representations from the industry that their exports were getting stuck because they were unable to submit the documents on the portal. These can now be furnished manually to the jurisdictional deputy/assistant commissioner. The Central Goods and Services Tax Rules , 2017, mandate that any registered person availing the option to supply goods or services for export without payment of integrated tax needs to furnish, prior to export, a bond or a letter of undertaking. This bond or letter of undertaking is required to be furnished in Form GST RFD-11 on the common portal. The bond is required to be given through the proper officer. That is, it has to be furnished to the jurisdictional commissioner, who could even be based far from the exporter’s location. “Various communications have been received from the field formations and exporters on the issue of difficulties being faced while supplying the goods or services for export without payment of integrated tax and filing the Form GST RFD -11on the common portal (www.gst.gov.in), because of which exports are being held up,” said a clarification issued by the government.
NEW DELHI: Manufacturers and retailers can stamp new prices on their pre-GST stock of goods and sell them till end September, the government has said, ending the confusion over the stock that was left unsold on July 1, and checking potential malpractices. But a section of industry was upset that the government had not issued this clarification earlier. “If we would have known this earlier, the industry could have planned the transition better. Retailers would have not have been under pressure to liquidate old stock at almost cost price and primary sales from companies to trade would not have declined the way it did in June,” said Videocon chief operating officer CM Singh. Any increase in maximum retail price (MRP) due to GST on the older inventory will have to be advertised in two national papers, but there is no such requirement if the new MRP is lower, said a notification issued on Tuesday. The government has also sought to cap the price increase because of the transition to new GST rates by explicitly stating in the notification that the difference between pre-GST retail price and the revised price “shall not, in any case, be higher than the extent of increase in tax”. The same principle will also apply in the case of imposition of fresh taxes. “We have granted relaxation till 30.9.17 to industry under Packaged Commodities Rules to write new MRP on items of reduced prices due to GST,” consumer affairs minister Ram Vilas Paswan tweeted. The minister added that fall in prices due to lower GST should be passed on to consumers and that the government would take legal action against vendors who did not declare revised MRP. “This is basically to curtail potential malpractices by trade and manufacturers who may want to tweak pricing and make higher profit,” said B Krishna Rao, deputy marketing manager at Parle Products, the country’s largest biscuit maker. Tax experts said the move to allow sale of old stock at revised prices will particularly help those companies whose products now fall in a higher tax category. “MRP may need to be revised in certain cases, specially where the GST rate is now 28%,” said Pratik Jain, leader-indirect taxes, PwC. Jain said even after factoring in the 60% deemed credit on the Central GST component allowed on existing stock, there would be a loss of 6-7% at retail level. “This is a welcome relief for the industry. However, while increasing the MRP, it needs to be ensured that benefit of deemed credit is appropriately factored in,” Jain said. The old MRP will have to be necessarily displayed on unsold inventory and stickers specifying the revised prices can be pasted alongside, said consumer affairs secretary Avinash Srivastava Revenue secretary Hasmukh Adhia said the new tax has been accepted in the country and that as of now, there had not been a single case where there had been any problem. He said the government was keeping a close watch on prices and the supply situation. Over 200 officials of the rank of joint secretary and additional secretary have been assigned 4-5 districts each to closely watch the implementation process. In addition, central monitoring committee of 16 secretaries will meet every Tuesday to keep a tab on supplies and prices. The revenue secretary said toll, mandi charges, fee on vehicle entry into states will continue but there will be no levy of any entry tax on goods movement. About 2 lakh new registrations have been done on the GST Network of which 39,000 have been already approved.
KOLKATA: Several smaller mobile phone and consumer electronics retailers and jewellers across the country are selling products at pre-GST rates by issuing backdated bills, either to clear out old inventory, or because they are not yet ready to move to the new system. Consumer electronics industry insiders said backdated billing may continue for next couple of days till fresh stock billed on GST rate arrives in the market. “There is confusion in the market and not all retailers are yet ready to migrate to the new tax system since their backend and billing systems require a software update which is taking time,” said a senior executive with a leading consumer electronics and mobile phone maker. “Moreover, traders who are still stuck with old inventory will suffer loss since the companies have agreed to compensate stock which is just 30-60 days old. Hence, backdated billing is happening,” the person said. Sources said several electronics retailers and jewellers maybe using backdated bills to lure back customers who have vanished since the rollout goods and services tax (GST) regime as tax rates have increased on most products. Consumer electronics and mobile phone stores have been almost empty since Saturday as most consumers completed their purchases last month, fearing an increase in prices. Jewellers across India, too, have reported more than 60% decline in sales since the start of this month due to the hike in taxes on gold to 3% under GST from 2% earlier. For televisions, refrigerators, washing machines and air-conditioners, the effective tax rate under old taxation system was around 26% including all cesses which has now gone up to 28% under GST, with all companies proposing a price hike of 2-3%. So, retailers selling on backdated bills are pitching it as a bargain deal for consumers. Several neighbourhood mobile phone retailers in southern states of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Telangana are selling on bills drawn on June 29 and 30 to clear out old stock, industry insiders said. These markets had 5% value added tax ( VAT ) on mobile phones, while the GST on mobile phones is 12%. Such backdated bills are also happening in Delhi where VAT on mobile phones below Rs 10,000 was 5% while it was 14% for costlier phones. That means Rs 10,000 plus mobiles are cheaper under GST regime in the capital. Most retailers ET spoke to, however, said they are forced to use backdated ‘kachcha’ bills because their systems are not yet updated and they are yet to meet all the compliances. “Otherwise, we have to just shut shop,” said a cellphone retailer in Mumbai. “We expect the system will be updated in a day or two,” he said. Another cellphone retailer in Delhi said he is selling on backdated manual bills at old prices since his IT system is yet to be GST-compliant. Retail industry apex body Retailers Association of India CEO Kumar Rajagopalan said these things are transitionary and will continue in the short term. “But in the long term, every product has to be accountable under GST and law will catch up,” he said. Most of the mobile phone makers and consumer electronics companies said they will start billing under GST from Wednesday once their IT system is fully upgraded. Several jewellers across India, too, are selling gold at the earlier tax rate. Jewellery industry associations, however, have issued strong advisories to the trade not to indulge in back-dated billing. Surendra Mehta, national secretary at India Bullion and Jewellers Association, said that while it is difficult to peep into the books of individual members, the body has issued strict instruction not to resort to any unethical mechanism. Nitin Khandelwal, chairman at All India Gem & Jewellery Trade Federation, said he is yet to come across any incidence where gold is being sold in backdated bills. He said no organised and well established jewellers will try to take the illegal route for selling gold. “It may so happen that customers may have booked gold before June 30 and they are taking delivery now. In these cases, the final bill will have calculations of the earlier VAT regime as gold was booked at the earlier rate. There is no wrongful activity in all these cases,” Khandelwal said. Some jewellers said they are offering old rates under new tax regime to lure customers back into shops. (With inputs from Sagar Malviya in Mumbai)
CHENNAI: India's largest fireworks manufacturing cluster in Sivakasi , Tamil Nadu, will restart operations from Thursday after assurances for the Tamil Nadu government that the state will actively pursue efforts to slash a singular 28% Goods and Services tax rate for the sector, which largely has been paying only a Value-added Tax of 14.5%. Well over 90% of the Tamil Nadu's fireworks manufacturers , clustered around Sivakasi in Virudhunagar district, fall under the Rs 1.5 crore turnover bracket that exempted them from a central excise levly of 12.5%, while only about 50 factories had to suffer both VAT and the central excise to cumulatively pay 27% in the erstwhile tax system. Now, under the GST system, both small firms hitherto paying 14.5% and large ones paying 27% will have to pay a flat 28% GST. Sivakasi had announced an indefinite shutdown ahead of the midnight transition on June 30 but the strike has lasted only for six days, robbing the sector of manufactured goods that would have fetched Rs 100 crore in revenue. "We have pulled out from our stance upon assurances that Tamil Nadu will strongly support our case at the GSTN Council meeting. However," clarified A Asaithambi, president of Tamil Nadu Fireworks and Amorces Manufacturers' Association, "the withdrawal of strike has been made only on an assurance and not a definitive promise that the tax rate will be lowered. "The Sivakasi industry turns over Rs 3,000 crore annually, giving employment to nearly 8 lakh people. Among their considerations for reopening their factories, said Asaithambi, was the livelihood of the numerous daily wage labourers who had had to forego salaries over the last week in view of the strike.
NEW DELHI: French car major Renault today announced a reduction in price of its vehicles by up to 7 per cent in India, ranging between Rs 5,200 and Rs 1.04 lakh, to pass the GST benefit to its customers. The company has cut price of its hatchback Kwid Climber AMT between Rs 5,200 to Rs 29,500, SUV Duster RXZ AWD between Rs 30,400 to Rs 1,04,700 and that of Lodgy Stepway RXZ between Rs 25,700 to 88,600. "Reflecting our customer-first approach, we have decided to pass on GST benefits to our customers, further enhancing the value proposition of our products," Renault India Operations Country CEO and Managing Director Sumit Sawhney said in a statement. The roll out of the GST is one of the biggest achievements of the government, facilitating a one nation, one tax system, aimed at fostering a congenial business environment, he added. "While there may be a short-term disruption as the whole system adapts to this economic transformation, but in the long term it will be very positive for the economy and corporate India," Sawhney said.
The credit profile of organised jewellery retailers is expected to improve with favourable demand outlook for CY2017, improving organised trade with rapid formalisation of the sector, and better financing environment with enhanced access to gold metal loans, according ICRA ICRA says that there has also been an opportunistic buying by consumers / traders for the next festive / wedding season ahead of the Goods and Service tax GST ) rollout, thus driving the jewellery sales in Q2 CY2017. Commenting on the positive outlook, Subrata Ray, senior group vice president, ICRA, said, “Following a tumultuous CY2016, jewellery demand has rebounded sharply in the last two quarters. Easing liquidity pressures with fading impact of demonetisation , extended wedding season, better farm output and rising income levels have supported the growth. Further the demand is unlikely to be impacted by the GST rate which at 3% is only marginally higher than the earlier rates. The net tax outgo post GST is in fact seen declining by 1.0% for a retailer (where jewellery manufacturing is outsourced and input credit is availed) and increasing by 1.2% (if credit is not availed). This will trigger the retailers to source from tax compliant suppliers / goldsmiths enabling them to claim input tax credit on jewellery and other services availed. That said, the transition towards streamlining of supply chain will be challenging with some temporary impact on demand”. Over the medium to long term, ICRA expects the industry to record a 6-8% growth, the demand will remain supported by cultural underpinnings, evolving lifestyle, growing disposable income, and favourable demographic profile. While jewellery demand will be affected in Q3CY17 with interim challenges of adaptation to new tax regime and also lesser number of auspicious days, the impact is likely to be neutralised in Q4CY17 with resumption of festive demand. The gold jewellery demand is expected to grow by ~6% (volumes) and 9% (in values) during CY2017. Industry level consolidation in the near to medium term wherein organised players may acquire smaller entities (or) enter into franchise agreements is also expected, with rising competition they are likely to leverage the available opportunities and achieve business growth.
NEW DELHI: The government has increased the number of consumer helplines on GST from 14 to 60, with specially trained professionals handling queries related to the new indirect tax regime. "The government wants that the benefits of decreased prices, after the imposition of the GST, should reach the common man. For this we have increased the number of consumer helplines to 60," Food and Consumer Affairs Minister Ram Vilas Paswan told reporters here. Earlier, there were 14 national consumer helplines, he said, adding that now professionals have been trained specifically to address the concerns of consumers related to the Goods and Service Tax (GST). The contact number of the national consumer helpline is 14404. Paswan said the government will take legal action against vendors not declaring revised MRP after the GST. An official notification was issued by the government saying that the packaging material or wrapper not exhausted prior to July 1 may be used for packing of material till September 30, 2017. This will be permissible after the manufacturer or importer or packer makes correction in the retail sale price on account of the GST implementation, by way of stamping or putting a sticker or online printing. The government has also introduced an anti-profiteering provisions that mandates companies, which benefit from lower indirect taxes, must pass on the benefits to consumers in terms of lower prices. The GST, introduced from July 1, replaces a thicket of indirect central and state levies.
There is no shortage of bad news for the guar sector as the newly-imposed 5 per cent GST on guar gum and guar meal and dwindling demand for the commodity by US importers are compounding their troubles. While all other cattle feed has been kept out of the purview of GST, the 5 per cent tax on guar meal will make it less competitive. Talking to ET, Rajesh Kedia, director, Chimique India, said: "India produces around 6-8 lakh tonnes of guar meal annually which is suitable for cattle feed. A 5 per cent GST on guar meal vis-à-vis other cattle feed will put us in a disadvantageous position. " Soya meal is the major animal feed used in India apart from guar meal. Similarly,a 5 per cent tax on guar gum, majority of which is exported, has upset the industry as it feels that it will increase operational hassles at a time when demand for the commodity has fallen 20 per cent due to dwindling oil prices. The fallout of low oil prices is that North America has lowered imports of guar gum from India in recent months. "Guar gum is an exportable item and therefore, claiming a refund will be a procedural hassle," Kedia said. Kedia said falling crude oil prices is affecting guar gum exports. "Though oil rigs are coming up in North America they have found some alternative to guar gum which are they using now. Only if crude oil prices go up will guar gum demand and prices go up," he added. Crude oil prices have dropped 20 per cent since May . The imposition of GST comes at a time when guar gum exports which, till April, was showing an upward trajectory, have started falling. According to Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), guar gum exports from India had increased by more than 100 per cent during the first four months of 2017 compared to the same period last year. India exported about 1.98 lakh tonnes of guar gum till April 2017 compared to 98,935 tonnes last year. Guar gum split is used in fracking, a method for extracting shale gas that involves pumping pressurised gas into the ground. Guar gum is derived from guar seed. India is the largest producer of guar seed in the world with Rajasthan being the largest producing state. Gujarat and Haryana also produce guar seeds. Guar gum prices plunged 22.53 per cent since April 17 when it touched a high of Rs 8,586 per quintal. On Tuesday, guar gum was trading at Rs 6,651 per quintal.
SRINAGAR: The opposition during the special session of J&K assembly on Tuesday cornered the PDP-BJP government accusing them of compromising autonomy of the state through implementation of Goods and Services TaxThey blamed the government for being unable to detail about safeguards the latter claims to have incorporated to implement GST in the state, without tampering with the state’s constitution and financial autonomy of the state. After the new tax regime has been implemented across India, interstate trade in J&K has stopped and the business community claims that the trucks--carrying commodities and essentials--coming into the state has reduced by 60 percent. J&K Coordination Committee - an umbrella organization of trade bodies and civil society members–formed to fight against the implementation of GST at the cost of special status of the state have called for complete shutdown in Kashmir and Chenab Valley on Wednesday. The government arrested at least 40 businessmen who were protested outside the civil secretariat herein Srinagar. The PDP-BJP government convened the special session to end logjam over GST implementation after failing to evolve a consensus over the issue outside the legislature. J&K finance minister attempted to salvage the situation in the morning reassuring the opposition, while tabling the ‘modified’ GST resolution, which he claims will not compromise the special status of the state in any way. However, National Conference leader, Devender Rana , not impressed with the government’s explanations stated that if the ‘right decision’ was not taken, even the husk of the article 370, ensuring special status to J&K would not remain. “This will be the last nail in the coffin of the constitutional guarantees and autonomy of the state ensured within the Indian constitution. The idea of India is incomplete without the idea of J&K. We are opposed to implementation of 101 amendment in its current form,” said Rana, who asked government to explain whether the NDA government has given any assurances of incorporating the changes concerning the GST to be suggested by the state government. The government in an attempt to silence Rana, informed the house about his personal businesses already registered under GST, thus seeking explanation and even resignation on ethical grounds. “Does money count more than dignity and constitution of the state. What government is doing is subterfuge and nothing else,” Congress leader Nawang Rigzin Jora said in the assembly. The government further complicated the situation, by not allowing the media to carry mobile phones, cameras and laptops inside the assembly in the morning, which resulted in temporary boycott and deferment of the session. The journalists protested and later attended the session, after speaker of the assembly came out to apologize and blamed miscommunication for this ‘undemocratic’ step. The upper house of the assembly, legislative council, was also adjourned immediately after the GST resolution was tabled as the government and opposition members engaged in a verbal brawl followed by exchange of blows and invectives.
SRINAGAR: Amid protests by the NC and the Congress, the Jammu and Kashmir Assembly today adopted a resolution for implementing the GST in the state. With this, all the states have implemented the Goods and Services Tax The resolution moved by state Finance Minister Haseeb Drabu , was adopted through a presidential order calling on the Centre to safeguard the special status and exclusive taxation powers of the state. He said Article 370 of the constitution is not compromised in any way through this presidential order. After two days of discussions, the resolution was adopted by a voice vote even as the National Conference, the Congress, the CPI(M) and an Independent MLA protested against implementing the new indirect tax regime in the state in its present form. Earlier, replying to the debate, Drabu said the resolution calls upon the Centre to implement the GST in the state while incorporating safeguards for protecting its special status and exclusive taxation powers. "We will appeal, argue, debate and discuss with the Government of India, as a matter of principle, section 5 of the J-K constitution, which gives us exclusive powers of taxation, shall be protected," he read from the draft of the resolution. "The GSTN council will not be a way to subvert the process and enough safeguards will be built as regards the state of Jammu and Kashmir empowering the representatives of Jammu and Kashmir and bringing in under the ambit of Article 370," Drabu said. He said the business activity in the state had dropped to almost 50 per cent due to non-implementation of the GST after the new regime was rolled out in the rest of the country on July 1, causing losses to the state exchequer. Giving comparative data, the finance minister said while 2,000 truckloads of goods were imported on July 4 last year, only 1,000 truckloads were imported on the day this year. He said export of goods from the state has also dropped from 300 on this day last year to 150 this year, a 50 per cent decline in trade. On the revenue earned by the state, Drabu said it had dropped from Rs 82 crore on July 4 last year to Rs 40 crore yesterday. "This shows that business and trade in Jammu and Kashmir cannot function without the GST," he said. Responding to the opposition charges, the finance minister said there was no compulsion on the government to bring a resolution in the Assembly on the GST but it was done as part of "restoration of a process". "If the GST overwrites Article 370 (of the Indian constitution) or section 5 (of the J-K constitution) I will not come back to this House," Drabu said. 
By Baijayant `Jay' PandaToo often we disparage the good because it is not perfect. There is no better, or more ironic, demonstration of this than some of the whingeing about the just launched Goods and Services Tax. Of course, by now we should be inured to the spectacle of political parties in the opposition stridently opposing the very same issues they had championed when in government. As also parties in government pushing through initiatives they had vehemently opposed when in opposition. But what is remarkable about GST is opposition parties opposing what they have only recently not just agreed and given shape to, while being in the opposition, but also voted for in Parliament. That process lasted more than two and a half years on the home stretch, from the December 2014 reintroduction of the GST bill in Parliament till just hours before last week's midnight launch, with last-minute revisions to the rates on some items. Overall, the process had taken 18 years since being conceptualised in then Prime Minister Vajpayee's economic advisory panel. The nearly two-decades long journey saw different actors rise to the occasion at different times, laying the groundwork for a fundamental rejig of India's indirect taxation system. For instance, it saw the sagacity of Vajpayee, who assigned the task of designing GST to a committee headed by Asim Dasgupta, a PhD in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) then serving as the finance minister of Communist Bengal. Also on display were the brave attempts, without requisite support in Parliament, by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and his finance ministers P Chidambaram and Pranab Mukherjee. They first mentioned GST in the 2006 budget and in 2011 introduced the bill. As with many important initiatives during the UPA's hapless decade, GST did not pass. Nonetheless, its listing in Parliament put a crucial building block in place, making it difficult thereafter for Congress to oppose its passage beyond a point. However, it needed Prime Minister Narendra Modi's massive electoral successes, not just in the 2014 general election that gave him the numbers in the Lok Sabha, but also in subsequent state elections that in turn have been adding to his numbers in the Rajya Sabha, for GST to become feasible. And even after that, it took his steely-eyed determination to leave a lasting legacy , and finance minister Arun Jaitley's considerable strategic and negotiating acumen, to make GST finally happen. None of that means GST in its present form is perfect, in fact far from it. It is not the simple, one-rate, one set of documentation, national tax originally envisaged. The give and take process of reaching a final iteration that could get sufficient votes in the Parliament of the planet's largest, most diverse democracy , took a toll. The best description of GST now is that it is the least bad of all the versions that stood a chance of being legislated. But why should we be excited about what some call a suboptimal version?The answer lies in welcoming that which, even if not perfect, is profoundly good. GST immediately replaces more than a dozen existing taxes. Although not as simple as it should ideally have been ­ and perhaps can evolve to be in future ­ GST today nevertheless dramatically simplifies India's indirect taxes, as well as ease of doing business. Furthermore, it removes the cascading effect of taxes on the vast majority of items consumed by Indians. And in doing so, creates inbuilt incentives for compliance, with evaders willy nilly having to bear higher input costs than their GSTcompliant peers and competitors. Most importantly , it finally unites India as a single market after seven decades of Independence. The value of that cannot be overstated, with incalculable benefits likely to emerge from no longer hobbling ourselves with fragmented regional markets and disparate tax regulations. In some ways, the implementation of GST has the potential to be as transformative for India's economy as the Interstate Commerce Act was for the United States. That was enacted in 1887, more than a century after US independence, to overcome regional monopolies by railway companies. Paving the way for federal rather than state regulations in a host of sectors, it unified America's fragmented domestic markets and helped propel it to become the largest economy in the world. So why would an opposition party , which loses no opportunity to brag about having first moved the GST bill in Parliament, forfeit the opportunity to share the credit at its gala launch? The reason is not cussedness, as some believe. It is, instead, cold political calculus. Right or wrong, their calculation is that the complexity of such a radical tax makeover will lead to serious glitches and sustained dissatisfaction. In other words, ideal circumstances to stir the political pot, but only if you have kept adequate distance from the celebrations. That approach by the principal opposition party ­ essentially , waiting for this government to trip up ­ has been more or less its only strategy for the past three years. It has not worked so far, and there is no reason to believe it suddenly will now. To be relevant again, they must go beyond hoping for their nemesis to implode.
NEW DELHI: More than half of people in the country are unaware of the Goods and Services Tax, a survey by a mobile news application company has claimed. The survey of over 3.6 lakh people across the country found that two Telugu speaking states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana have the highest awareness on the GST with over 64 per cent of population knowing about it. People in Tamil Nadu have the lowest awareness level, the survey by Way2Online found. "Following an extensive research, the report concludes that less than half the population of India; 45 per cent to be precise, is aware of the new tax system. The remaining 55 per cent is unaware of what GST is," Way2Online said in a statement. Way2Online, a local language short news application, conducted this survey between June 26-30 with over 3,60,000 participants across the country. The new tax regime, which became effective from July 1, aims to put an end to number of indirect taxes levied on goods and services and stop duplication of taxes over a product The new regime taxes various goods and services at 5, 12, 18 and 28 per cent, while keeping essential commodities out. "Interestingly, even though many are aware about the GST in Telugu speaking States, majority is of the opinion that the change in the tax system is not a good news to them. Our survey showed that only 42 per cent of Telugites are convinced that GST is beneficial and the other 58 per cent responded with either 'Not Beneficial' or 'Have No Idea' about its pros and cons," the statement said. The survey found that 59 per cent of the urban audience know about GST but still 60 per cent of them think that the new tax regime would not make their lives better and 80 per cent assume that there will be a spike in prices or have no idea about its implications. "This uncertainty is not only with the Urban Audience but also with the overall population in our country. A total of 41 per cent expects a surge in the prices and 35 per cent are still not aware of its consequences," the statement said.
