SRINAGAR: GST became a fully national tax after the Jammu and Kashmir state assembly and legislative council passed the bill, even though the opposition expressed apprehension about the new tax regime.The state would send the bill to the President for concurrence and the 101 st amendment would be extended to J&K. Finance minister Haseeb Drabu assured that the state government would ensure enough safeguards and GST would not compromise on Article 370 and Section 5 of J&K constitution in any way. “If that happens, I will not return to this house,” Drabu said.Till now Article 370 was used only as an obstruction for whatever purpose, Drabu said and asserted on the need to use it as tool for empowering people of the state and not just as a defensive strategy. “Article 370 is being used as a tool to whip up political passions and draw politicalmileage. It is being used for creating fake controversies,” said Drabu, adding that J&K had acceded to India and India had not acceded to J&K.“We cannot expect the Government of India to change the Constitution to meet our requirements,” he said. Opposition leader Omar Abdullah took a dig at the government by tweeting: “With absolutely no clarity of what ‘constitutional safeguards’ the BJP-PDP government in J&K has agreed with the Centre the sham resolution passes.”
NEW DELHI: The cheer that goods and services tax has brought to the automotive market has diminished, with concerns mounting over the risk of states raising road tax to offset revenue loss. Maharashtra has already decided to increase the levy on vehicles by 2% to compensate for the absence of octroi, a state tax which has now been merged with GST.Automakers have cut prices from July 1 to pass on lower tax incidence under GST to buyers. They expected this to drive wholesale numbers in a traditionally lean July, with inventory at dealerships also running low. Increase in road tax, which is outside GST and set by states, now stands to dampen the prospects.Industry executives had feared as much, and had demanded the central government to subsume road tax in the overarching GST framework. “In the past too, every time the central government lowered excise duty, state governments increased road tax negating the benefit. That is why we had urged the government to subsume road tax in GST,” said Sugato Sen , deputy director general at industry body Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers.“Road tax was originally levied as a user charge, but now it has become a source for generating revenue every time there is some deficit.”An industry executive, who didn’t want to be named, said keeping the road tax out would dilute the purpose of GST. “We talk of one tax, one country, but still we have road tax varying as widely as 4% to 17% across different states. Consumers would still have to shell out different prices for purchasing vehicles in different states,” he said. “And, if state governments start raising local levies, the price benefits coming in from GST for the consumer lessen or get nullified.”In Maharashtra, the state cabinet on Tuesday approved a 2% hike in one-time vehicle registration tax on private two-wheelers and four-wheelers. There is already a 2% road safety cess on the tax collected at registration. The state government has held that since it will lose Rs 700 crore per annum on foregoing octroi and other local body taxes on vehicles under GST, it decided to hike the road tax which will generate an extra Rs 750 crore. Post the increase, the road tax on petrol cars in state will be in the range of 11-13%, while on diesel cars it will be 13-15% and on two-wheelers, 10-12%. The tax, though, has been capped at Rs 20 lakh to ensure that high-end luxury vehicles are not taken outside the state for registration.“Consumers pay road tax over and above the ex-showroom price of the vehicle. Any increase on this count would affect buyers directly. Given the hike, the overall vehicle acquisition cost (in Maharashtra) will largely remain unchanged despite manufacturers reducing prices as per new rates under GST,” said a senior executive at a New Delhi-based automaker, who did not wish to be named. Jnaneswar Sen , senior vicepresident for sales and marketing at Honda Cars India , concurred. “One of the expectations post GST was that with vehicle prices coming down, demand will get stimulated. If total acquisition cost goes up given this hike, demand will get affected to the extent that registration charges increases,” he said.
KOLKATA: With GST coming into place from July one, tea traders, brokers along with Tea Board and tax commissioners have sorted out the billing issue on how to impose the new tax during auctions."The billing issue relating to imposition of GST at the auction houses has been sorted out", secretary of Calcutta Tea Traders Association (CTTA) Kalyan Sundaram told PTI.Sundaram said that auction (sale number 27) in Calcutta will start today from 2pm and continue till Saturday lunch time.This sale was supposed to be held on Tuesday and Wednesday, but was postponed due to the billing issue on how to raise GST (both CGST and SGST) invoice after auction is complete.According to him, it had been decided that once tea is sold at the auctions, the producers would raise a tax invoice to the broker.This tax invoice would comprise 2.5 per cent SGST and 2.5 per cent CGST.Unless this was done, then buyers, sellers and brokers would not be able to avail of input tax credit.Auctions and Guwahati and Siliguri had started from 9 am today, he said, adding that at Coonoor it was also being held today.Auction at Coimbatore would start later, he said.Sundaram said that Tea Board had organised a workshop comprising Assam's tax commissioner, commercial tax commissioner of West Bengal and Commissioner of Central Excise.
MUMBAI: The government has now set its eyes on cleaning up political funding in the country and will soon announce some measures to root out this problem, finance minister Arun Jaitley told businessmen and bankers on Wednesday.“We are looking at some major steps to be announced by which we want to cleanse the entire political funding in India,” Jaitley said via video link at the SBI Banking and Economics Conclave in Mumbai. “For the last 70 years, the world’s largest democracy has survived on funding which really brings no credit to the democracy. And I think it has been the prime minister’s insistence that this has to be one of the subjects that the government has to take up now as a top priority.” He was responding to a question from SBI chairman Arundhati Bhattacharya on major reforms that can be expected after GST and demonetisation Spending on political activity has soared in recent years and even risen faster than per capita income, but bulk of political expenditure remains off the books. Jaitley’s Budget in February had contained some measures including caps on cash donations and an electoral bond that will be issued by certain banks for contributions to political parties.The cap on cash transaction is Rs 2,000 at present.Political parties can receive funds by cheque or digital mode from donors.Jaitley did not elaborate on the steps to fight corruption in political funding but had pointed out in the budget speech that the RBI Act will be amended to enable the issue of electoral bonds.Jaitley also said implementation of GST and follow-up action on the after-effects on demonetisation will be key to future growth over the next two years.“After demonetisation the manner in which India has taken difficult decisions and implemented them showed our resilience,” the finance minister said. “These two (demonetisation & GST) reforms have made reform process far more easier and I believe that the next one or two years will be the period of implementation and net impact would be the buoyancy in the tax collections.”The finance minister also noted that while India’s current GDP growth was reasonable, it had potential to sustain high levels of growth over the next decade.“Once India is able to sustain this high level of growth, it is our responsibility as government to concentrate on areas that will add to further growth,” he said. “I do see India concentrating in a big way in some areas of infrastructure. In some areas we have been doing well but we have to move faster in railways, concentrate on rural infrastructure, rural housing, sanitation in rural areas, irrigation in rural areas, these all have to be our emphasis over the next one decade.”
MUMBAI: Power equipment makers said introduction of the Goods and Services Tax ( GST ) will bring them close to a "level playing field" with the Chinese, but the fundamental problems in the sector persists and lack of orders is bleeding these units.The 18% GST that applies to Indian manufacturers will also be applicable on imports now. But manufacturers point out that the Chinese still have access to cheaper credit and inputs and they would be fighting for a slice of the shrunk pie of orders in the domestic market since there are no signs of recovery in capex for thermal power.Capital goods manufacturers in the power sector have been complaining that their Chinese counterpart have an undue advantage over them and are able to price products cheaper. Of the 117 gigawatts of projects ordered for the 12th Five year Plan, almost 45% were bagged by foreign players led by the Chinese.The 13th plan has not seen any major fresh investment in the conventional power sector, leaving companies like BHEL , L&T, Thermax among other with dry order pipelines. “Post GST, we would have level playing field.But, we see concerns and challenges over its implementation for next 3-6 months. In our power business, tax is either reimbursable or inclusive. The tax arbitrage enjoyed by the Chinese manufacturers will not continue after GST,” said Shailendra Roy, member of the board and whole-time director (power, heavy engineering & nuclear), Larsen & Toubro.“It is a step towards level playing field with foreign makers but our GST is still among the highest in the world. The Chinese enjoy other costs advantages that we don’t,” said MS Unnikrishnan, managing director and chief executive officer of Puneheadquartered Thermax.
KOLKATA | NEW DELHI: Consumer goods makers are unlikely to change prices of pre-GST stock by putting fresh stickers as mandated by the government because it will be costly and operationally challenging to pull back unsold stock.Fast-moving consumer goods ( FMCG ) firms have decided to keep prices intact for old stock even in cases where their tax incidence has increased under the goods and services tax regime and will change prices only for the new stock that will be manufactured henceforth.For products where tax rates have been lowered and prices need to be reduced, companies said they would rather release fresh stock with reduced MRPs than go through the hassle of relabelling old inventory.Large companies such as PepsiCo, Parle, Dabur Britannia and Marico had started controlling inventory in May and June, so unsold stocks of most are in the range of 5-7%.Consumer electronics companies, which mostly sell products at a discount to the labelled maximum retail price (MRP), are reducing discounts on the unsold inventory without tinkering with the MRP sticker to factor in the 2-2.5% price increase under GST.The government on Tuesday allowed companies and retailers to sell pre-GST stock till September 30 on condition that they stamp revised prices on unsold goods.“Every single pack will have to be stickered and retailers could take stickers off in case of price changes. For companies which have to change price on existing stocks, the process is going to be very tough,” biscuit giant Britannia’s managing director Varun Berry said. The maker of Tiger and Good Day biscuits does not intend to change stickers on existing stock.Parle Products marketing head Mayank Shah said managing price tags across millions of packs “is not feasible” for most companies since it will be a long-drawn and cumbersome process. “While the government’s intention is right, implementing it is not viable.”White goods maker Godrej Appliances’ business head Kamal Nandi said there is room for reducing discounts since the consumer electronics industry sells on the concept of market operating price and not MRP. “The difference in tax incidence will be passed on to customers and discounts will come down. This will be a more viable way to go about it rather than relabelling products,” said Nandi.The business head of a leading Korean electronics goods maker said relabelling will lead to significant expenses, including the cost of advertising. Further, if even one batch is left out in the exercise, the company will be held liable. “It is impossible to pull back all products that are already with distributors or retailers and change their MRP label,” he said. Videocon chief operating officer CM Singh said the company was issuing a new price list to its dealers that will reduce customer discounts and increase dealer prices.Consumer electronics companies usually offer 10-15% discount on MRP on televisions, refrigerators, washing machines, microwave ovens, air-conditioners and small or kitchen appliances. This will come down by 2-2.5%, executives said, as the industry transits to a 28% tax bracket compared with the earlier tax incidence of around 26% (including all cesses).These companies have 25-30 days of old stock in warehouses or with distributors/retailers. Also, manufacturers will take 2-3 months to exhaust the raw material already in stock, which was purchased under the earlier tax regime.For FMCG companies, it’s been a mixed bag. GST has increased the tax incidence for skincare and ayurvedic products, detergents, beverages and lower-priced biscuits to 28%. But several products, including cookies, toothpastes, soaps and hair oils, will be taxed at 18% under the new tax regime compared with 22% earlier.
The Goods and Services Tax ( GST ) that was to bind the entire country in a single uniform tax structure is already showing chinks in its armour.The Maharashtra government has sprung a surprise by slapping an additional 2 per cent vehicle registration tax above GST on private two and four wheelers.This has deprived state consumers of benefits accruing from the lowered prices that are privy to buyers in other states.Vehicle manufacturers incidentally took the lead in slashing prices post GST and these cuts ranged between 3-5 per cent or even more depending on the model. Luxury car companies like Mercedes-Benz and Jaguar Land Rover had started the party a month in advance to prevent consumers from postponing purchases.Some dealers in Nagpur and Mumbai in Maharashtra who ETAuto spoke to termed the additional vehicle registration tax as a one- time road tax that will be levied as fee by the Road Transport Office on registration of a new vehicle.The tax on imported cars has however been capped at Rs 20 lakh compared to the earlier 20 per cent tax on the total cost of the car.This tax is expected to compensate the revenue loss of the state on account of octroi and local body taxes that have been subsumed in GST.While most of the other states in the country have abolished the octroi and LBT, Maharashtra has continued with it till now. Octroi has been prevalent in Maharashtra since 1965, a tax levied on goods entering the boundary of the civic bodies.The annual loss due to the discontinuation of octroi and LBT on vehicles in Maharashtra is pegged to be to the tune of an estimated Rs 700 crore under the GST regime, according to reports.With the new vehicle registration tax, the state hopes to mop up Rs 750 crore.So effectively what the state government has done is replace one state tax with another doubling the tax rate.But isn't this an anomaly? The GST Council when it was fixing multiple GST rates had floated the GST Compensation Law to compensate states for any tax revenue loss on account of GST enforcement, for a period of 5 years.The Centre had further allayed all fears of the states at length and brought them closer together in order to make GST a reality.So why then are states like Maharashtra having the carte blanche to impose additional taxes that fall under the state ambit? Are these additional taxes not undercutting the very foundation of the 1 nation, 1 tax structure premise of the Government?Already after much haranguing the states agreed to multiple GST rates including 5,12,18 and 28 per cent.Though Finance Minister Arun Jaitley has said that the 12 and 18 per cent GST rates may be integrated at a later date, the revenue secretary recently spoke about states being allowed to hedge revenue losses by imposing the mandi tax, vehicle registration fee, or even by raising entertainment tax like Tamil Nadu has done.Is this mandate not giving other states an opportunity to burden common people with additional taxes as well?A fallout of the additional vehicle registration tax in Maharashtra could be that buyers register their new vehicles in different states and then bring them to Maharashtra.K Madhavan, Director mobility, Frost and Sullivan is of the view that that such an act will be easy to crackdown on by the police and state authorities due to varied state registration numbers.The challenge will be to ensure that the crackdown is effective as technically registering vehicles in other states and plying them in Maharashtra without paying road tax will tantamount to illegality.Such a situation had earlier arisen in Tamil Nadu where Puducherry registered premium vehicles were plying on their roads due to the lower road taxes prevalent in the union territory.Puducherry registered vehicle numbers have even been traced to Bangalore.However due to the crackdown by the police these errant vehicle owners have now been reined in by the police.
NEW DELHI: Flipkart has begun delivering mobile phones to all cities of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar from July 1, as the goods and services tax ( GST ) regime has reduced the tax outgo besides doing away with cumbersome paperwork. Rival Amazon, which has been delivering to these states, said it will ramp up expansion and last-mile delivery of higher value goods in Bihar.Delivering handsets -- among the ecommerce players’ highest selling category -- to two of the three most populous states in the country is critical for both market leader Flipkart and challenger Amazon as they slug it out for a higher share of the growing e-tail market.“With GST coming in, markets of UP, Bihar and some parts of Gujarat will now be serviced, where orders were virtually nothing,” said Ayappan Rajagopal, senior director for smartphones at Flipkart. “We intend to increase our share in these markets which make up close to 13-15% of the total Indian market,” he said."With the implementation of GST, we are now working towards specifically enabling customers from Bihar to shop for products upwards of Rs 10,000," an Amazon India spokesperson said.Pre-GST, Flipkart was delivering phones under Rs 5,000 to a limited number of cities in Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat, and was not making any deliveries in states of Bihar. The company said that a few issues were thwarting its businesses in these states.One, total tax rate in Uttar Pradesh was as high as 30% inclusive of value added tax ( VAT ) and entry tax, and in Bihar and Gujarat, the tax rate was around 22% and 23%, respectively. After GST, the overall rate on mobile phones across online and offline has come down to 12%, thus making the case for beginning of deliveries to these states.Two, with GST, the requirement to locally bill the phones, which also meant having a local warehouse specifically for that market, goes away, thus enabling ease of doing business.Yet another enablement under GST is that buyers don’t have to file a VAT declaration, along with registration number of the vehicle bringing in products exceeding a value of Rs 5,000, which a delivery person has to furnish if goods are coming from another state. The problem was a big one for ecommerce players like Flipkart as goods are billed in Karnataka and are sent to other states for deliveries to consumers. The company had therefore set a cap of Rs 5,000 on shipments to UP, which it removed from July 1.“We expect sales from these states to go up in the coming months and help us increase our overall sales by 10-20%,” Flipkart’s Rajagopal said.The company plans to add warehouses within a month across the country to enable faster deliveries, he said, adding that the largest online retailer doesn’t expect any increase in prices of its existing handset portfolio under the new tax regime.Amazon, which had continued to service most cities in UP and Gujarat and assisted consumers by filling out the requisite forms, said that the company had invested in building its fulfilment centres in Lucknow and Ahmedabad to meet the growing demand of customers and sellers in the region."We have witnessed continuing acceleration in new customer acquisition growth with a 500%-plus growth from towns like Singrauli, Alwar, Dholpur, Muzaffarnagar and Shivpuri and this is only expected to go northwards," the US retailer said, adding that non metros continue to drive new user growth, with share of new customers in non-metros moving past 75% in 2017.
NEW DELHI: Providing relief to SEZs, the government has exempted goods imported by units or developers of special economic zones from integrated goods and services tax (IGST)."The central government...hereby exempts all goods imported by a unit or a developer in the Special Economic Zone ( SEZ ) for authorised operations, from the whole of the integrated tax leviable thereon under...the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 read with section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Service Tax Act, 2017," the Department of Revenue has said in a notification.An SEZ area is considered to be a foreign territory for trade operations and duties, and is mainly set up for promoting exports.Exports from SEZs grew by about 12 per cent to Rs 5.24 lakh crore in 2016-17. The shipments from these zones in 2015 -16 were aggregated at Rs 4.68 lakh crore.Till May 1, the government had approved as many as 421 zones. Out of this, 218 are operational.
NEW DELHI: India Inc may have to deal with another avatar of GST — the tax may be applicable on senior executives’ big-ticket perquisites over and above those mentioned in the employment contract and on gift items of over Rs 50,000. However, companies should be able to claim input tax credit on these intracompany ‘transactions’.Tax professionals ET spoke to said the rate may be in the 18-43% band, depending on the nature of the perk/gift. A finance ministry official, who did not wish to be identified, said an employer’s gifts to employees will be treated as supplies without any consideration and attract GST. However, companies are likely to be able to claim input tax credit on it.Keeping tabs on company perks and gifts will not be an additional enforcement cost to the government, tax experts said. All purchases by companies will be available on GSTN . Therefore, during audits these issues can be easily identified.GST rules say services by an employee to the employer will not attract tax if they are related to his/ her employment. However, other kind of services may attract GST. “If an employee acts as a DJ in a company offsite and gets paid, such payment by his employer will attract GST,” said Waman Parkhi , partner, indirect tax, at consultancy firm KPMG “Free services not part of employment contract and gifts above Rs 50,000 per year will be subject to GST. This could increase cost for companies offering such benefits. The government should clarify ambit of free services — such as gym, crèche, meals — that will be subject to GST,” said Pratik Jain , partner, leader indirect tax at PwC.Companies may even start including some of these perks in the employment contract as a consequence of this new GST definition, tax experts said. “In case these perks become part of the job contract, they would attract additional income tax and employees would have to bear the cost,” said MS Mani, senior director, Deloitte Haskins & Sells LLP.Such perks may include paid holidays, holiday homes, club memberships and chauffeur assistance. Companies often give gifts to employees – it can be a small one like a pen or an expensive one like an iPhone or gold coin of 20 grams. All such gifts come under GST.“This means companies will now have to keep an account of all gifts given to each employee and start paying tax on some gifts,” said Parkhi.However, there can be cases where a gift is a reward for performance. Parkhi said: “A question may arise whether a particular item is a gift or a reward and whether a reward should attract GST or should be treated as a performance bonus in nature of salary and therefore under the ambit of income tax.”Company cars are one of the biggest perks senior executives get. Personal use of company cars can be treated as a service and attract GST. “It will be a big exercise to find out what is the personal use unless a log book, as in the case of government vehicles, is maintained by the employee,” Parkhi said.As ET had reported earlier, the amount that companies pay to leasing companies is significantly higher under GST – from 12-14% VAT earlier to 29-43% under GST.“The company that provides cars on a lease to senior employees may or may not pass on tax increase to the employee depending on their HR policies,” says Mani of Deloitte.
Talking to ET Now Bibek Debroy , Member, NITI Aayog , says there are some rules which will need to be clarified and tweaked and that should not take more than three months or so.Edited excerpts:There are a lot of people who simply did not believe that the deadline would be adhered to although there have been deadlines in the past. There has been a deadline in 2010, there has been a deadline in 2012. Sufficient notice was given, if notice is the right word to use, and there was sufficient consultations. People who are saying that they are unprepared, they have not been consulted, are being somewhat unfair.Obviously if there is going to be a change, there will be some amount of necessary adjustment, some issues of transitions, some change or tweak in rules. As far as the productivity question is concerned, it is impossible to estimate that.I understand that cigarette prices have come down of all things! So, people will presumably smoke more! I am using that trivial example to illustrate that there is no reason for this apprehension that people will consume less.You use the word “due to demonetisation.” You should be aware it is difficult to control everything. What the blip was due to, we do not really know and I want to flag that had it been due to demonetisation, you would have seen an effect in the nominal growth rate. The nominal growth rate shows no sharp dip, it is the real which is obtained by deflating the nominal with the deflator. So if I am going to buy that argument of “due to demonetisation,” then you will have to show me it has happened in the nominal growth rate. Otherwise you will have to explain to me why demonetisation should lead to a change in the deflator.What many people do not seem to realise because they cannot be bothered to check is that this was an estimate made for the ideal GST. We have only begun the process of moving towards that ideal GST.Why should GST have any impact on inflation if the government has already allayed the fears? Asking the question means that you have some fresh fears. So tell me what those fresh fears are.Monetary policy is a completely separate issue. You have presumed that it is going to have some effect on inflation.I would not use the word unfair. Obviously, there are problems, there are transition problems and if one comes across a problem, it is reasonable on the part of the government to adjust the rules. Had the government not listened, you would have come and said is’nt it unfair of the government not to listen to this? So, the government gets it both ways.It depends on the definition of the pain. There are some rules which will need to be clarified and tweaked that should not take more than three months or so.The Union government has guaranteed that it will compensate the stage for every revenue losses but I would say it is too early to judge that.
