KOLKATA: The difference between online and offline prices of iPhones has narrowed to Rs 1,500-Rs 2,000 from Rs 5,000-Rs 8,000, as goods and services tax (GST) has taken away a cushion that had allowed sellers on ecommerce platforms to offer discount.Apple distributors informed retailers that the margin difference was possible as they had supplied the products to online sellers from states that had a low value added tax ( VAT ), three senior retail industry executives said.VAT has now been merged into GST, the indirect tax regime that came into effect on July 1. Since the GST rate is uniform across the country, they cannot take benefit of the tax arbitrage that VAT offered.Online sellers can now, at most, pass on the savings in distribution cost, according to the distributors, as they are resorting to a uniform margin across sales channels with no big price difference, the executives said.Apple India did not respond until press time on Thursday to an email seeking comment. Prices of iPhones on Amazon and Flipkart have already increased this week, reducing the gap with offline trade. Apple used to bill iPhones for online sellers mostly from southern markets such as Hyderabad and Bengaluru, where the VAT was 5 per cent.Since the average VAT in the country was 12-14 per cent, this allowed online sellers to pass on the gain to consumers. The same strategy was adopted by a few other, mostly online-exclusive, brands as well. For them, too, the prices will go up unless they absorb the higher tax incidence to remain competitive, as Asus did recently. Since iPhone being higher priced, the price difference was more pronounced.As a result, around 50-55 per cent of the Apple phones sold in India is through ecommerce sites, compared with the smartphone industry average of 30 per cent. Spice Group-owned retail chain Hotspot executive director Subhasish Mohanty said he expects the offline business of iPhone to grow faster now, especially in modern trade, since the price difference will disappear and as consumer expects certain experience with a brand like Apple which is possible only with organised retail.“Our iPhone business had fallen by almost 35 per cent due to online discounting. This will now recover fully and we should be in the path to growth,” said Mohanty. The chain has over 200 multi-brand cellphone stores. A senior executive with a leading cellphone store said Apple wants to build its relationship with general and modern trade and expand the number of authorised resellers. It is partnering small cellphone store owners to set up exclusive stores of 450-500 sq ft and has already set up 200 of them.“It wants to build over 1,500 such outlets in the next 18 months to cement its offline presence,” he said. Apple distributors said they may pass on additional discounts to online sellers during sale events, which typically take place before festive seasons and once every quarter, since the sellers then buy in huge numbers.“Such discount may bring down online prices of iPhone, but those will be a temporary event and not year-long,” one of them said. Apple India grew revenue in 2015-16 by 54 per cent to Rs 9,997 crore, overtaking home grown Micromax to become the second largest smartphone company in the country by revenue. It is yet to file results for 2016-17.
MUMBAI: India’s single producer levy, prospects of falling financing costs, and higher farm income underpinned by monsoon rains should help carmakers accelerate the rate of growth in Asia’s third-biggest economy, said the head of the country’s biggest SUV manufacturer. Pawan Goenka , MD of Mahindra & Mahindra, said a healthy festive season towards the latter half of the year should help the industry expand faster than earlier forecast. With vehicle makers dropping prices by as much as 15 per cent in some of the states after the July 1 introduction of the Goods and Services Tax (GST), consumers are expected to advance their purchasing decision.For FY18, the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM) had given an outlook of 8-10 per cent growth, an estimate many in the industry believe will have to be revised upward. Speaking to the media on the impact of GST on the sector, Goenka said the implementation of tax reforms has been seamless and the entire value chain has aligned to the new tax structure quickly.“We have seen many disruptions in the last one and half years — right from the NGT ( National Green Tribunal ) ban to the Supreme Court banning diesel vehicles, the demonetisation and the GST. With most of the uncertainty out of the way, we look forward to a very good festive season. The growth rate will be higher than what we were expecting earlier,” said Goenka.According to M&M, which is also the country’s biggest seller of farm equipment and tractors, inventory levels across the industry are lower by up to a week from the average of 4-6 weeks. Hence, carmakers will use July and August to replenish the stock and be ready for a healthy growth in the upcoming season beginning early autumn. In the next two months, primary sales to dealers will be stronger. Goenka expects retail offtake to increase from the second half of July, with benefits of up to Rs 1.5 lakh on vehicles such as the top selling XUV Goenka said the monsoon rainfall is fairly good: If interest rates also move favourably, it will be a very healthy sign for the automotive industry. “We will be eagerly waiting for the upcoming policy decision. A 25 or 50 basis point drop will improve the sentiment further,” he added. There will be a transition loss on the stock that was sold pre-GST, but Goenka said that it may not have a significant impact on the quarterly earnings of the company. He is hopeful on the review of higher tax on used cars, but said the reversal of higher tax on hybrid vehicles seems unlikely.“Several representations have already been made and we have put forth our point of view, but it seems that decision is firm and final. It is very clear that it (higher tax rate on hybrid vehicles) is not an accident, it is thought through… I do not expect any major change in hybrid rates,” Goenka said.To be sure, the head of M&M expressed disappointment over the increase in road tax in Maharashtra, but sounded hopeful that other states may not follow. Maharashtra government had to increase the road tax to compensate for the loss of Octroi, which was a very state-specific levy.
NEW DELHI: Manufacturers will face penalty, including jail, for not printing revised price on unsold and new products under a new GST rule. The Centre on Friday amended consumer protection laws to ensure you are not shortchanged of the benefits manufacturers earn under GST.Consumer Affairs Minister Ram Vilas Paswan today warned of a fine of up to Rs 1 lakh and a jail term if new post-GST rates are not printed on the inventory in the interest of consumers. A committee of the consumer affairs ministry has been set up to address consumer grievances on GST and even helplines have been increased to 60 from 14 to address tax related queries, he said.It is mandatory to print revised MRP on the inventory, else stringent action will be taken for violation of the Packaged Commodities Rules, Paswan warned.Manufacturers have been allowed to clear the unsold stocks by September with new MRP.The move comes after the Centre allowed traders to sell pre-GST stock with new MRP stickers till September 30. The move to enforce the direction was taken after consumers complained of arbitrary taxes on MRP.Non-compliance of this will attract a fine of Rs 25,000 for first time offence, Rs 50,000 for second time and up to Rs 1 lakh penalty for third offence onwards and even imprisonment of up to one year, he told PTI separately.On Thursday, the consumer affairs ministry decided to ban the 'dual' MRP policy, a practice through which sellers charge a higher MRP for their products in certain spaces like malls, airports and hotels.As per the order, which comes into force starting January 1, 2018, companies will not be allowed to charge a different price for water, soft drinks or snacks at premium locations.The decision was taken after an appeal made by the department of legal metrology of Maharashtra (LMO).The LMO cracked the whip on high profile manufacturers for charging a higher MRP at malls, upmarket restaurants, hotels and airports.It was observed that the quality, quantity and weight of these products were exactly the same as the ones sold by common kirana stores at a lower price.In view of the new order, the LMO has now issued fresh notices to companies like Coca Cola, Pepsi, Red Bull, Eureka Forbes, Flipkart, Amazon to desist from the practice of dual MRP and follow mandatory declaration norms for packaged commodities.Paswan also said the new rates to be printed on the inventory should be communicated to the consumer affairs ministry and advertised for better awareness of consumers.
Kolkata: India's changeover to a single producer levy might just help achieve a long-pending federal objective -get residents to buy paper gold as a viable investment.Sovereign gold bonds, which are de-linked from any physical underyling, would likely be preferred by investors in the metal after the introduction of the Goods & Services Tax (GST) as the instrument does not attract a producer levy, unlike gold coins and bars that do at 3%. Furthermore, the bonds earn an annual interest. Until last month, gold coins and bars would attract VAT of 1% -1.2%. But now these will attract GST of 3% the same rate applicable to jewellery. There was 1% excise duty on gold jewellery until July 1, though there was no such tax on gold bars and coins.“With the introduction of GST, investment in sovereign gold bonds has become more attractive than buying physical gold. Paper gold has an edge over physical gold: It also earns an interest,“ said Shekhar Bhandari, business head (global transactions & precious metals), Kotak Mahindra Bank . The tenure of sovereign gold bonds is eight years, with exit option from fifth year to be exercised on the interest payment dates. Gold trade analyst Bhargav Vaidya said: “Paper gold is the road ahead for the country. Sover eign gold bonds will gradually become popular with India's investing community." India annually consumes 850-950 tonnes of gold.Analysts believe that the price differential between gold coins or bars and sovereign gold bonds will stoke demand for the bonds.Although the government had kept a target of garnering Rs 15,000 crore in the first year since its inception in November, it has able to garner Rs 5,400 crore from eight tranches in the first 17 months of its existence, Former RBI governor YV Reddy said in 'Gold Investor', a publication of the World Gold Council, that the “efficacy (of the bond) is untested and, to my mind, the benefits to both the government and buyers are not obvious." However, commenting on the government's three initiatives ­ sovereign gold bond, gold monetisation scheme and sovereign gold coin -Reddy said that across the board, the government policy is at an embryonic stage.“Importantly, however, recent developments demonstrate a positive attitude towards gold ­ a radical departure from the past."Surendra Mehta, national secretary of India Bullion & Jewellers Association, said that the sovereign gold bond is a much better product that the exchange traded fund (ETF). “We believe that Rs 6,000 crore investment in gold ETF is no longer required. The government needs to direct the closure of the gold ETF scheme to reduce our import bill. Simultaneously , it will enhance the demand for sovereign gold bond.“
The government may see a revenue loss of around Rs 1 lakh crore and some jump in inflation in the coming year due to goods and services tax ( GST ), Thomas Isaac, Kerala's finance minister said on Thursday.The revenue loss could be due to reduction in taxation rates for certain goods under GST compared to earlier. On the other hand, there could be inflation for first five months, said Isaac.Sanjay Mahendru, commissioner ( service tax 1), Mumbai however added that several companies that had managed to escape taxes earlier would now be under GST's net. This would lead to increase in the number of tax payers. “Around 6.5 million people have already registered on GSTN. GST will lead to more transparency, due to minimum interaction between the taxpayer and the tax official,“ said Mahendru.The government expects more a total of little more than 80 lakh registrations within a month.Mahendru added that as of today, there were around 50,000 trained tax officials who not only understand GST fully, but would be in a position to monitor and implement it in the best possible manner.R Kavita Rao, professor at the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy, said that inflation may rise for next few years but would even out.Concerns were also raised whether GST could impact working capital requirements of Indian companies.
While the expectant rollout of the Goods and services tax GST ) triggered a string of online sales across platforms and categories, its implementation on July 1 had set the scene for a decline in these offers. However, most popular e-commerce sites seem to be carrying on their sales.With the price of some products expected to go up this month onward, vendors on e-commerce platforms like Flipkart Amazon India and Paytm Mall swooped in to supplement the increased demand for items like hardware, large appliances and furniture. More importantly, non-GST compliant sellers - who are now reportedly delisted from these platforms - rushed in to sell off their wares, albeit at absurdly low price points.Fashion - which enjoys a high volume of transactions on these portals - is still a favourite.Flipkart - which recently launched its own private label for women and men, namely, Divastri and Metronaut - is still offering customers up to 70% discounts on fashion products, including bags and watches. Amazon India is also offering similar deals across brands including Adidas, Levi's and UCB."Sellers on these marketplaces have a significant upside in volume of sales since they are able to reach customers across the country," says Utkarsh Biradar, Senior VP - Products at Shopclues , which is offering sportswear at 80% cut. "We do not see any difference in taxes on goods sold online and offline even with GST and hence consumption or demand is unlikely to change," he further adds.Furniture, which is a high-margin category, is also flying off the shelves despite the rate of plywood - used in the manufacture of most wooden furniture articles - going up at 28% under GST. Pepperfry 's ongoing 'Happy GST Sale' is offering up to 55% off on most products, including beds, wardrobes and shoe racks. Flipkart is also offering up to 80% off on home and furnishing items.Under GST, 1211 items have been categorised under various slabs. As per the rates announced under the new tax structure, customers have been expecting a surge in the prices of premium garments and mobile phones - both of which fall under the 12% slab. 28% tax on certain beauty and wellness products and large appliances have also had little effect on their online sales, which are still being offered up at dirt-cheap price points.While Flipkart is offering up to 35% off on large appliances like washing machines and vacuum cleaners, perfumes and deodorants are selling at minimum 50% off on MRP. 18% tax on books and cameras also seemed to have created zero impact on sellers who are still offering great deals on Canon and Nikon cameras on Flipkart and offering up to 50% off on certain books on Amazon India.Breaking down the brouhaha over the online sales in recent weeks, Senior Director at Deloitte India MS Mani offers a simple explanation:"What seems to have happened is that e-commerce sites have woken up to the fact that GST would bring uncertainty in the minds of customers on whether prices would go up or down," he says."In this scenario, customers are buying products and e-commerce sites are simply tapping in on that sentiment. This has seen an uptick on sales and traders do not see any reason for those to go down, thereby continuing with their deals even after the implementation of GST," he adds.Mani also goes on to add that most e-commerce companies are already well organized and to them, GST will not cause a lot of disruption. "GST would not lead to any slowdown. It is not bad for either customers or sellers and will only make people work in an organized manner," he feels.Although the launch of the new tax regime was driven by chaos and confusion, the country's leading online retail players had made it strictly mandatory for merchants to register with their new Goods and Services Tax Identification Numbers GSTIN ) if they wanted to continue operating on their platforms. While some expected non-GST compliant vendors to fall off the e-commerce web with this move, others feel it is largely irrelevant."Majority of sellers on larger e-commerce were already compliant under the earlier legislation, while others obtained relevant permits in the last few weeks of June," says Mani. "Some may be relatively affected for various reasons, but that proportion would be very small," he added.Concurs Shopclues' Biradar: "Most of our top sellers are GST-compliant and the government has given an extension to smaller sellers to register themselves, hence we did not see any dip in our GMV post GST," he says. "We have also taken several measures and initiatives to help our merchants become GST-compliant," he adds.
Checking out of a hotel in the southern Indian state of Kerala this week took so long that I almost missed my flight. It wasn’t the hotel staff’s fault; their work, temporarily, had been doubled. As a polite note in my room reminded me when I checked in, they would have to present two invoices to me when I left -- one for the days prior to July 1, and one for the days after. For at midnight on July 1, India migrated to a new, more comprehensive indirect tax regime, known as the goods and services tax or GST The scenes of chaos at my hotel’s reception will have been repeated, to a greater or smaller degree, in countless shops and establishments across India. The transition to the GST -- which aims to unite multiple federal and state indirect taxes into a single system -- isn’t likely to be easy. That the government has rushed into it will only exacerbate the pain.That said, the GST is a major step forward, one of the few real efforts in recent years to reform the Indian economy. The transition might be chaotic and the current GST itself may fall well short of what it should be. Nevertheless, it represents the hope that India will, in its own muddling way, continue in its efforts to build a modern, competitive economy. And these efforts depend crucially, as with the GST, on reforming the Indian state.Does the passage of GST mean that such reforms are more or less likely now? Well there’s some good news, some bad news and some pretty appalling news.First, the good news: It seems the government at least recognizes that the Indian state is -- in the words of Harvard political scientist Lant Pritchett -- “flailing.” The central idea behind the GST is to privatize tax enforcement. This is not in fact as shocking as it sounds. Now, if you have to pay indirect taxes, you will only receive tax credits for your inputs if your supplier has also paid his or her share of taxes. Over time, it’s hoped, this will mean that larger businesses will pressure their smaller suppliers to enter the tax net.I’ve already heard multiple stories from executives in larger businesses about how they’ve struggled to educate their suppliers about the GST. Some online shopping portals have had to remove suppliers that didn’t seem ready to comply with the new rules. Bureaucrats hope that this kind of pressure will succeed where enforcement has failed: It should create an incentive for small and medium-sized enterprises to sign up as GST payers. If they don’t, they could lose business rapidly. While this will make life more difficult for companies, the logic is at least grounded in an incentives-based view of the world. It’s worth a shot.But it’s too soon to claim that Indian policymakers have suddenly become more realistic about the state. Here’s the bad news: The introduction of the GST doesn’t necessarily mean that tax administration -- currently split up between various state agencies and the central government -- will be reformed or unified. Indeed, the need to placate civil servant lobbies is one reason why the final GST falls so short of what it should be. Banks, for example, are expected to register for the “single” tax in each state rather than centrally.And now we come to the truly appalling news: the GST’s infamous “anti-profiteering clause." In effect, the new law insists that all benefits from the GST be passed on to consumers in the form of lower prices. If a new “anti-profiteering authority” determines that any company hasn’t done so, it can levy fines or even force the company to shut down.Think about this for a moment: A new tax regime that is supposed to make businesses more competitive insists that additional profits should be passed on, regardless of demand and supply conditions. The government says that it doesn’t intend this clause to be used, that it will be temporary and that it’s meant only a “deterrent.” Yet which bureaucrat is going to resist the opportunity to make an example of companies? The “examples” chosen will be, in and of themselves, arbitrary -- and who can believe that there will be no bribery and corruption involved in the choice? How will the facts of any case be determined without confidential information about costs and so forth being turned over to the authorities -- and what are the chances that that information will remain confidential?This sort of clause shows the Indian state at its worst: It is, in fact, one of the most intrusive rules introduced in the decades since liberalization. The GST is a big reform. Whether it signals that India’s leaders now have the instincts of reformers is another thing entirely.This column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of the editorial board or Bloomberg LP and its owners.
Revenue of listed companies may rise an anaemic seven per cent, led by the consumption sector in the June quarter, but difficulties in the export-linked sectors and the GST introduction may cap the same, pulling down the margins by 1.2 per cent, says a report.Rating agency Crisil expects the aggregate topline of companies, excluding finance and oil players, to grow seven per cent in the June quarter over the same period last year. However, margins are expected to contract by 1.20 per cent on the pre-tax level to 20.4 per cent, it said."Consumption-driven sectors, including automobiles, airlines, FMCG and retail, but excluding telecom, are estimated to have grown at a healthy pace of 10-11 per cent," Prasad Koparkar, a senior director at Crisil Research said.The report mostly blames the introduction of Goods and Services Tax (GST) from July 1 for the poor revenue growth, saying revenue growth across sectors could have been higher but for the new tax regime, which led to a lot of companies going slow on sales."There could be demand and supply disruptions in the short-term due to GST, though from a long-term perspective, the new regime will lead to efficiency gains and greater tax compliance," it said.Terming the likely spike in revenues as a "heartening" trend, Koparkar said the same sectors were affected by the note-ban and growth had fallen to 4-7 per cent levels in the second half of the last fiscal.However, it is the export-linked sectors like information technology which is a cause of worry, as growth is expected to come down to 3 per cent from the double-digit levels earlier, it said.The note blames strengthening in the rupee, coupled with a rise in protectionism and pricing pressures in the US for the expected dip in revenue growth for the IT sector. On the margins front, the report blames the rise in inputs costs and pricing pressure as the likely reasons for the contraction."A rise in key commodity prices such as crude oil , steel, aluminium and cement is expected to have pared the profitability of end-user sectors such as automobiles, petrochemicals, housing and tyres by 1.30 percent, 2.30 percent, 3.30 percent and 4.70 percent, respectively," another Crisil director Rahul Prithiani said.He added that for the pharma sector, the margin contraction can be much higher at 5.50 per cent on pricing pressure and lack of exclusivity period for generic drugs, but IT companies will manage to hold on to the spreads on a rise in the share of high-margin digital services.The report sees an improvement in the outlook for earnings for the current fiscal year, as it expects rural demand to pick up on the back of favourable monsoons, farm loan waivers and higher MSP for crops.However, the all important revival in private investment activity is "still a few quarters away", it said.
NEW DELHI: Samsung , the country's biggest consumer electronics and white goods company , has reduced prices in the key Mumbai region after imposition of GST.The price cut across categories spans televisions, microwave ovens, refrigerators, washing machines and air-conditioners. New prices have been conveyed to dealers, according to the communication seen by TOI. A company spokesperson, however, did not confirm price cuts. It is not yet clear whether the company is also reducing prices in other cities, including Delhi, in the new tax regime.However, close rival LG increased prices of LED TVs after imposition of GST. Panasonic has also said that it will raise prices of TVs and white goods such as refrige change prices for various products, the price of 22inch LED TV has been reduced from Rs 13,900 to Rs 13,500, a 3% reduction.The company has also given an even-lower `suggestive retail price' (SRP) to dealers at Rs 13,200.The price of 32-inch TV has been cut by 8% (from Rs 38,900 to Rs 35,900). The 49inch TV is now cheaper by 10% at Rs 84,900 against Rs 94,500 earlier. Prices have also been reduced for all other TV models. In the AC category, 1-tonne split unit has become cheaper from Rs 31,400 to Rs 30,300. The 1.5-tonne unit will now cost Rs 63,200 against Rs 66,600 earlier, while 2-tonne unit will now bear a tag of Rs 51,900 compared with Rs 54,500 earlier.
MUMBAI: Oral care leader Colgate-Palmolive (India) has dropped prices on toothpastes and toothbrushes by 8-9% following tax reductions in the new GST regime. The move by Colgate-Palmolive, which has a market share of around 56% in toothpastes, is expected to trigger price cuts by other players as well. Post-GST, the tax rate on toothpastes has come down from around 24% to 18%.“GST has enabled Colgate-Palmolive (India) to extend to its consumers the benefits of reduction in MRPs by 8 to 9%, for the key categories of toothpastes and toothbrushes. The revised prices are effective for all shipments starting July 1 and we are working together with our partners in our demand and supply chain to facilitate an orderly transition. The implementation of GST will greatly enhance the ease of doing business in the country,” a Colgate-Palmolive (India) spokesperson said in response to TOI’s query.Colgate Strong Teeth (100 gm), which was earlier costing the consumer Rs 52, has now been priced at Rs 46. Similarly, on Colgate SlimSoft Toothbrush, the maximum retail price (MRP) has been dropped from Rs 65 to Rs 60.A few days back, Hindustan Unilever passed on GST benefits to consumers on select soap and laundry products. ITC, too, has announced consumer promotions on its Fiama shower gel and bar range, Savlon soap, Vivel soap and Superia, offering discounts of up to 30-35%. Some FMCG companies are understood to be destocking in trade over the last ten days amid confusion regarding GST rules. An Edelweiss Research report said companies with high proportion of wholesale trade will be impacted more as channel checks indicate that quite a few wholesalers have still not registered under GST.In the case of Colgate-Palmolive, which has a higher dependence on the wholesale channel, the Edelweiss Research said it expects volumes to decline by around 7-8%, year on year, in the first quarter of the current fiscal, primarily owing to destocking at the wholesaler level.
BENGALURU: It has been eight years since Mansoor Ahmed changed his caliper. The one he owns was bought for Rs 20,000. Now, they cost more than double. “It is a challenge to buy a caliper when the cost of living has gone up so much. I know really poor people who haven't changed calipers in 15-20 years. After a point, it could cause the disability to worsen,“ says Ahmed, a senior manager with a Bengaluru-based non-profit.For disabled people like Ahmed, the 5% GST on basic aids and appliances like calipers, Braille writers and cochlear implants is an additional load. “We are already burdened by other costs -illnesses and medicines. It's quite unfair if I must pay more if I have to walk,“ says Ahmed.The decision to tax aids and appliances for the disabled continues to draw flak despite a hastily put together statement last week reducing GST and capping it at 5% for 22 categories of products. Cars will continue to have 18% GST even if they are retrofitted for a disabled driver. The disabled find it hard to reconcile that they will have to shell out more while items such as sindoor and bangles got a waiver. This is the government that launched the Ac cessible India campaign and Inclusive India campaign. I don't understand why they should charge people to walk with a cane,“ says Nirmita Narasimhan, policy director, The Centre for Internet and Society.The economic burden is accentuated by a lack of institutional support, whether in terms of accessibility to public transport or provision of affordable aids. “There is close correlation between poverty and disability . Most of us can't step out of our houses as roads, pavements and public transport are inaccessible,“ asks Javed Abidi, director, National Centre for Promotion of Employment for Disabled People.Narasimhan notes in her submission to the government that the 21 million disabled record low literacy level (59%, below national average of 74.4%) and low work participation (36.3%).To reduce the financial burden, Abidi and others fought to do away with taxes on aids since 2000. “We could bring down tax rates, sometimes as high as 20%, on various items to 5%. In 2006, it became zero and the last decade was the most important one for disability rights. Instead of making aids more affordable, we are now going back 10 years and charging 5% again,“ says Abidi, a wheelchair user.
BENGALURU: Come October, customers will get to know who is the best trader supplying goods or services as dealers will be rated based on their tax compliance.The tax compliance rating, that'll be on the lines of credit rating of companies, will be done automatically and displayed on the web portal of the Goods and Services Tax Network ( GSTN ). "As the entire transaction is web-based in the GST regime, the technology can be leveraged for various innovations, and tax compliance rating is one such innovation. This is going to be one of the highlights of GST," said MP Ravi Prasad, joint commissioner of commercial taxes.The rating will done on the basis of best practices of traders, including punctuality in filing tax returns, payment of tax, business attitude, transactional behaviour and other parameters. Officials in the GST Council said the new taxation regime mandates rating of traders so that buyers can choose the best suppliers.The ratings will be between 0 and 10 and the best traders will get 10 rating points. Ritivik Ranjanam Pandey, commissioner of commercial taxes, said the modalities were being worked out and the rating system was expected to be rolled out sometime after the first round of filing tax returns and that tax payments are scheduled to be completed on September 20."The GSTN portal will assess the data after completion of filing of tax returns and tax payment. The rating would be displayed instantaneously," Pandey said.While the rating system is expected to start in the first week of October, Pandey said the thinking was to give traders some more time so that they are well settled in the new taxation system before they are assessed."It would be unfair to give bad ratings at the very first incidence of tax, when even technology may suffer teething troubles. Moreover, it'd be fair to create widespread awareness before rolling out the rating system. So, it may take a little more time after October," Pandey said, adding that the schedule of the launch is yet to be finalised.Tax compliance of traders is, in a way , related to fair pricing of commodities as the dealer has to clearly mention the selling price of the commodity, separated from the tax components on the invoice and the same has to be uploaded to the GSTN portal. However, the tax-compliance rating is seen to be significant for business-to business (B2B) customers."It is important for companies getting supply from dealers. If the supplier fails to pay tax, then the purchaser would not get the input tax credit. So, it is significant to know the supplier's compliance before placing order,“ said Arpith Mehta, vice-president of Clear Tax, the e-filing website that has been shortlisted as GST Suvidha Provider (GSP). A GSP is an agency identified by the GST Council to provide IT solutions and GST process assistance to companies and individual traders; 34 agencies have been identified as GSPs. Apart from GSPs, Assistant GST Suvidha Providers (ASPs) are there in the market to help traders. Mehta said several GSPs have already started giving orientation to their clients and Clear Tax has instituted an internal rating system for its clients.With GST rolled out on July 1, both traders and consumers are getting used to the new taxation system. In the normal course, traders are expected to file their monthly tax returns online on or before the 10th of every month and pay tax before the 20th. However, the government has given time till August 20 to file the first returns for the month of July, which would be a sort of soft-launch. Traders have to follow the regular procedure from September.The tax-compliance rating system under GST will be one of the many positives of the newly introduced taxation regime. This will not only discipline errant traders, but will also lead to greater customer awareness, something that is largely missing in the prevailing system. Considering timely payment of tax will be related to fair pricing of commodities and services, traders have to ensure they aren't lagging behind, for that would mean losing out on business. And with the ratings available for everyone to see, making a choice would be extremely easy. With a system like this, accountability will find precedence as non-compliance could prove costly.
CHANDIGARH: Seeking all rice brands to be brought under the 5 per cent GST , the registered basmati brands are terming the levy as discriminatory in the current version. The companies claim that distributors and retailers will prefer unregistered brands to evade GST.The opposition to GST is also sparked as top basmati brands like Dawaat and India Gate fall in exempted list while several small players have come under the ambit of the tax. Under GST rice brands that are registered under Mark Act 1999 have come under 5 per cent GST while unregistered brands have been extended exemption.In a letter to the union finance minister Arun Jaitely, owners of Amritsar based leading rice brand 'Lal Qila' of Amar Singh Chawal Wala has said that the tax is contrary to 'One Nation One tax'. "It would promote registered companies to float unregistered companies to evade tax," Arvinder Pal Singh, director, Amar Singh Chawal Wala told ET. He maintained that no trader in India is ready to stock and sell registered branded rice products as they would like to be out of GST."The tax will affect domestic sale and also reflect in exports," Arvinder Pal Singh, director, Amar Singh Chawal Wala told ET.Many basmati brands with high volumes and sale are still not registered due to infringement issues. Rice major KRBL Limited on 3rd June 2017had maintained that its premium rice brands India Gate, Indian Farm, Unity and Lotus are not registered in class 30, under the Trade Marks Act, 1999 hence nil GST is applicable on it.All India Rice Exporters Association (AIREA) has raised the matter with GST Council and sought clarity over ambiguity about the purview of GST on rice companies. "We are expecting more clarity over the purview of GST on registered as well as unregistered rice brands shortly," Rajen Sudershan told ET.Presently, less than 10 per cent brands are registered with Trade Mark Act 1999 and some leading brands are unregistered due to trade mark infringement issues. "Many unregistered brands fetch high premium and volume but will now get relaxation under GST," he said. "The tax would look discriminatory in current version and defeats endeavor to build domestic brands and quality," Vijay Sethia former president AIREA. He said that several brands with comparatively lower volume would also be taxed.Several beneficiary will include companies with over turnover of over Rs 2000 Crore as their brands are not registered with Trade Mark Act 1999 due to some Legal and Technical issues," Ashok Sethi, past president Rice Millers and Exporters Association, said.
