In the textile sector , the mood is upbeat. Analysts of all hues and leanings are convinced that the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime is a harbinger of glad tidings for all.The players in the textiles sector are already planning major expansion in production and trade. Especially so in the manufacturing and exports, that is, the weavers’ community and the traditional craftsfolks represented by the ministry of textiles (MoT). GST era is also expected to breathe fresh life into the MoT’s ‘age-old’ management system. The words of the market gurus have turned out to be prophetic. In earle moves, the GST Council has announced a sharp cut in rates on the merchant services, whittling it down to 5 per cent from 18 per cent.Since the input goods used by these communities have been kept under various tax slabs, the existing high tax would have stunted their business, explains the council. The textiles and apparel industries are largely dependent upon these services, with over two-thirds of the volume manufactured in merchant factories. The individual job workers compete with these captive manufacturing facilities to survive. They also pay higher taxes. Now, with uniform tax rate, the future of job workers seems brighter. The GST timing could not have been more opportune. During the three years of NDA rule , the textile industry has taken giant steps forward, responding to the impact-oriented and people-friendly measures undertaken by the MoT.But to grasp the true significance of the progress, one must refer to its past. Few years ago, a leading national daily had referred to the MoT as ‘unglamorous’, that carries the burden of an economically embattled sector’. Harsh words, but the assessment made of the status of weavers’ community was spot on. Among the vast range of peoples’ groups that the MoT supports and nurtures that of the weavers’ is the largest.. It is also the poorest. Distanced from the real consumers by a rigid hierarchy-ridden administrative machinery and several layers of intermediaries, weavers can barely make two ends meet, working in small, ill-equipped family units.The story of India’s handloom sector , the traditional craft that provides livelihood to millions, has seemingly lost relevance in contemporary society. The good news is, under the current dispensation the scenario is changing. Here are the highlights of the work in progress: To create jobs and provide impetus to exports, the government offered package for garmenting and made-ups sectors in June and December 2016. The packages — worth Rs 6,000 cr — are designed to create 1 crore jobs in 3 years. The reform process received a major boost on August 7, 2015, when PM launched the India Handloom Brand. The day that would hitherto be celebrated by the government as the National Handlooms Day.It was aimed at promoting high value handloom products with new design, zero defect (in fabrics), zero effect (on environment) and assurance of genuineness and quality of the products. The other initiatives for promotion of handlooms include the setting up of trade facilitation centre and crafts museum at Varanasi and the launch of the e-Dhaga App in December, 2016 which helps weavers to access information for improving the supply chain management. To modernize the textile industry, the Amended Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (ATUFS) was launched onJanuary 13, 2016 with an outlay of Rs 17,820 cr for 7 years. The scheme is expected to attract an investment of Rs 1 cr and generate over 30 lakh jobs. So the times indeed are a changin’. Now, the social media network is abuzz with 22 m impressions on # IWearHandloom campaign on Twitter.The new media strategy has provided a fresh platform to the artisans, helping them to emerge out of the cloak of anonymity. The ministry has used the new communication medium innovatively to connect every single weaver to a consumer. And, of course, the digital platform connects the craftsmen (and women) to the huge body of buyers who use the yarn to earn a living. The weaving industry sustains as many as 32 other sectors. Direct interaction with this diverse base of ‘users’ is a vitally important factor.The ultimate aim is to ensure that these master practitioners are infused with a sense of pride and ownership. Only then would they feel confident enough to preserve what they have inherited and pass on the craft to the next generation. Let us examine the anatomy of the industry. It employs 12.5 million people, second only to agriculture.Its contribution to national GDP and exports revenue also is more than substantial. The handlooms business has grown at a steady pace in India, but the repositories of this unique craft form, that dates back to the Harappa civilisation, the weavers, have remained confined to the backstage. But not anymore.The government now is determined to make up for the lost time. So the new reforms process is on in full swing.The formula used is to introduce modern technology and global trends to the weavers, but take precaution to ensure that the uniqueness of their age-old skill remains intact. Going by the evidence on the ground, it certainly looks as though the longawaited Achhe Din (good times) has finally arrived for the weavers of India.
NEW DELHI: The government has said education will not become expensive under the goods and services tax (GST) that rolled out on July 1. Schooling up to higher secondary and most of the services provided to educational institutions are exempt from taxation under GST, finance ministry said.“There is no change made in any subject relating to education in the GST era, except to reduce tax rate on certain items of education such as school bags etc," a finance ministry statement said on Friday. Mid-day meal scheme as well as security, cleaning and housekeeping services performed in educational institutions up to higher secondary are also exempt from GST. Services relating to admission and examination up to higher secondary are exempt under GST, the statement said. The clarification came following concerns in some quarters that education will become expensive under GST.Services provided by an educational institution to students, faculty and staff are exempt. Transportation of students, faculty and staff services provided to an educational institution providing pre-school education, and education up to higher secondary school or equivalent are exempt from GST.Catering, including any mid-day meals scheme sponsored by the Central government, state government or union territory, to an educational institution providing education up to higher secondary school or equivalent, are also exempt."Thus, education up to Higher Secondary School level does not suffer GST on output services and also on most of the important input services. Some of the input services like transport, canteen etc provided by private players to educational institutions were subject to service tax in pre-GST era and the same is continued in GST regime," the statement said.Furthermore, services by an entity registered under section 12AA of the I-T Act by way of charitable activities relating to advancement of educational programmes or skill development for abandoned, orphaned or homeless children, physically or mentally abused and traumatised persons are also exempt.There have been reports education cost for certificate courses could go up as input tax credit is only available for primary education. Any institution providing education above higher secondary in cases where degree is not recognised under law would not be able to claim input credit. Industry had represented to the government on this issue.
The government on Friday launched an app called GST Rate Finder-- which as the name suggests, is your ready reckoner for all the tax rates that are to be levied under the GST (Goods and Services Tax) regime."First app of its kind which would be a ready reckoner for public, for customers, for consumers, traders, students, anyone who wishes to have very handily (GST) rates available. So, if you are in a market, a restaurant or anywhere you can easily check what the (GST) rate is," Central Board of Excise and Custom (CBEC) chairperson Vanaja Sarna said.The app is currently available on the Android platform, but will soon be made available for Apple's iOS users as well, the Finance Ministry said. The rates can also be accessed from the CBEC GST website.Once the GST Rate Finder app has been downloaded it can be used in offline mode as well."A taxpayer can search for applicable CGST (Central GST), SGST (State GST), UTGST (Union Territory GST) rate and Compensation Cess on a supply," the Finance Ministry said.The government has undertaken a slew of initiatives to educate and familiarise both consumers and traders since it launched GST in an elaborate midnight function on June 30-July 1 in the Parliament's central hall which which broadcast live for the entire nation.Earlier this week the government started a series GST "masterclasses" aimed at addressing queries and clarifying any confusion or doubt regarding the new tax regime. These "masterclasses" are in the form of hour-long programs held across six days. They are telecast live on the state run television channel Doordarshan along with live webcasts. The "masterclasses" are primarily conducted by Revenue Secretary Hasmukh Adhia who's joined by other senior government officials who'd be subject experts on the day's topic.GST is India's most ambitious tax reform since independence and subsumes over a dozen central and state taxes that were levied on goods and services earlier. Bringing the country under a uniform tax regime, GST is expected to add 2 per cent to India's GDP (gross domestic product).
KOCHI: Rubber wood based plywood manufacturers have said 28% goods and services tax slapped on the industry has hit it hard even before it could recover from the crisis after demonetisation “Majority of the plywood manufacturers have a turnover below Rs 1.5 crore. We were selling plywood made of rubber wood to dealers outside the state at 2% central sales tax against C form. That, with the 14.5 % value added tax, would bring the total tax to 16.5%. It is 11.5 percentage points higher now,’’ said Jose Chacko, owner of Delta Plywoods & Boards at Perumbavoor near Kochi, which houses about 400 plywood units Bigger manufacturers have not been affected since they were already paying about 27% tax earlier.Haryana and Kerala account for two of the biggest plywood manufacturing clusters in the country. Plywood is used mainly for interior designing in buildings and for making packing cases and cable drums.
MUMBAI: The goods and services tax regime may help organised players in consumer goods gain market share from their unorganised rivals , according to analysts, as the price differential of products is likely to reduce while making tax evasion incrementally difficult with a significant compliance cost burden.A new concept of reverse charge has been introduced under GST that was not part of the value-added tax imposed earlier. Under GST, implemented from July 1, the receiver of the goods becomes liable to pay taxes if the goods do not have tax paid from the supplier, said Amit Sinha, consumer sector analyst at Macquarie Research.“This will restrict transaction from players who are evading taxes and more importantly will discourage businesses from putting in extra cost in the profit and loss statement to reduce tax liability,” said Sinha. “The GST filing on a monthly basis will also reduce the chance of managing the system.” For years, local brands have been nibbling away share from leading consumer product companies, especially in soaps, detergents, hair oil, tea and biscuits, with more than 500 unorganised players operating in these categories.“Biscuits and snacks have at least 100 local players in Kanpur, Kolkata and Hyderabad,” said B Krishna Rao, category head at Parle Products, India’s largest biscuit maker. “They manage to keep costs and consumer prices low due to tax evasion, which will not be possible now.Hence, it is definitely an advantage for stronger national players.” In segments such as tea, smaller players and loose tea operators control 40% of the market, some operating in just one region or district. Even in detergents and soaps, hundreds of local companies enter the market at a time when crude oil prices, a key ingredient for detergents, bottoms out since that’s the only cost incurred in production.Under GST, the government will assign a rating to the trade and industry on the basis of its compliance standards and include who they are dealing with. The ratings will be available online, which will discourage traders from dealing with players with low scores.However, market share gains may not be immediate. “Market share shift from unorganised to organised will be a medium- to long-term theme. Micro, small and medium enterprises will likely face the maximum brunt due to loss of market share to the larger organised players,” Manish Jain, consumer analyst at Nomura wrote in a note.
PUNE: Union minister Dharmendra Pradhan today said the government is keen to promote green energy and it will intervene with the Goods and Services Tax ( GST ) Council to ensure that the GST rates on bio diesel and other green energy products are reduced.Pradhan, Union Minister for for Petroleum and Natural Gas was speaking at the inaugural session of Bioenergy Urja Utsava here. Union Minister of State for Energy and Coal Piyush Goyal too was present at the session.The event, aimed at bringing into focus the various initiatives in the country in the bio energy sector and towards developing an inclusive national policy framework and sustainable mainstreaming of such technologies, was organised by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in association with Mahratta Chamber of Commerce, Industries and Agriculture and National Yuva Cooperative Society."I and Piyush Goyalji are working together on the bio fuel and green energy and I can assure you that we will intervene with the GST council to ensure the GST rates on bio diesel and other green products are reduced," he assured the industry stakeholders.Under the GST rates announced recently, bio diesel, ethanol and other mixing products would be charged 18 per cent. For the last 10 years, bio diesel attracted zero excise duty.The government has been promoting bio diesel it wants to cut its crude import by 10 per cent with this environment friendly fuel. However, the high incidence of tax on bio diesel will make it costlier than diesel and ultimately make it uncompetitive.Pradhan who welcomed the farm loan waiver by the Maharashtra government, however said that it is not the ultimate solution and that farmers' community needs to be supported with the promotion of green energy and bio-fuel projects so that they get additional and sustainable income.He also assured the stakeholders in green energy and bio-fuel sector that the ministry will provide market to the green energy products and exhorted experts, entrepreneurs, students to explore the bio-energy sector and make it a mass movement.Echoing Pradhan's views, Goyal too stressed on the promotion of bio fuel and green energy and accused the Congress for not promoting the green energy during their regime."Our first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru had stated the importance of power alcohol (ethanol) in his book 'Discovery of India' in 1945, but till 2002 no government had thought of full pledged policy on green energy and it was under the AB Vajpayee regime, the policy to promote bio fuel was formulated and received a push," he said.Goyal added that it was after 2014, when Narendra Modi led government assumed office that the green energy and bio fuel received wings.
NEW DELHI: Indians travelling overseas may need to pay more for foreign currency notes they buy at home before leaving if the customs department has its way and imposes goods and services tax (GST) on their import into the country. Banks say they are perplexed at the customs department levying integrated GST IGST ) on such consignments, which are exempt from basic customs duty, and have sought a clarification from the government.Imports of currency could face 12% IGST if the government decides in favour of the customs department, which will make the notes costlier. A notification under GST categorically exempts rupee notes transfer to the Reserve Bank of India but not by banks.The move has led to foreign currency consignments getting stuck. “Stocks have been held up at the ports as there is a lack of clarity on the issue,” said a bank official. These officials say money doesn’t qualify as ‘goods’ as defined by law under the new tax framework.Industry expects the government to sort out the matter quickly. “Clearly, the intention cannot be to levy IGST on import of foreign currency,” said Pratik Jain, leader, indirect taxes, PwC. “We should expect a clarification from the government soon.”Banks and RBI import foreign currency. Notes are covered under the customs Act entry that includes unused postage, revenue or similar stamps of current or new issue in the country in which they have recognised face value, stamp impressed paper, bank notes, cheque forms, stock, and share or bond certificates. But paper money is exempted from customs duty and additional customs duty as per a notification of 2003.The IGST and Central GST (CGST) laws have a similar entry, notifying the rate of tax applicable on bank notes at 12%, exempting “rupee notes sold to RBI”.This has prompted the customs authorities to impose IGST on import of foreign currency notes. The banking industry feels that currency should not fall within the purview of GST as ‘goods’ under the GST law. It says this definition specifically excludes money and securities while covering every kind of movable property.
NEW DELHI: Indians travelling overseas may need to pay more for foreign currency notes they buy at home before leaving if the customs department has its way and imposes goods and services tax (GST) on their import into the country. Banks say they are perplexed at the customs department levying integrated GST IGST ) on such consignments, which are exempt from basic customs duty, and have sought a clarification from the government.Imports of currency could face 12% IGST if the government decides in favour of the customs department, which will make the notes costlier. A notification under GST categorically exempts rupee notes transfer to the Reserve Bank of India but not by banks.The move has led to foreign currency consignments getting stuck. “Stocks have been held up at the ports as there is a lack of clarity on the issue,” said a bank official. These officials say money doesn’t qualify as ‘goods’ as defined by law under the new tax framework.Industry expects the government to sort out the matter quickly. “Clearly, the intention cannot be to levy IGST on import of foreign currency,” said Pratik Jain, leader, indirect taxes, PwC. “We should expect a clarification from the government soon.”Banks and RBI import foreign currency. Notes are covered under the customs Act entry that includes unused postage, revenue or similar stamps of current or new issue in the country in which they have recognised face value, stamp impressed paper, bank notes, cheque forms, stock, and share or bond certificates. But paper money is exempted from customs duty and additional customs duty as per a notification of 2003.The IGST and Central GST (CGST) laws have a similar entry, notifying the rate of tax applicable on bank notes at 12%, exempting “rupee notes sold to RBI”.This has prompted the customs authorities to impose IGST on import of foreign currency notes. The banking industry feels that currency should not fall within the purview of GST as ‘goods’ under the GST law. It says this definition specifically excludes money and securities while covering every kind of movable property.
Talking to ET Now, Rajat Sharma , CEO, Sana Securities, says whether Idea-Vodafone or Bharti-Tata, he is negative on telecom sector consolidation. Edited excerpts:The FMCG pack in general should do well going forward. But broadly, GST would probably be negative in the short term for the markets as companies try to adjust their accounts and that is the real worry for me. The markets are already overvalued. If the earnings do not come due to GST and demonetisation , the first quarter of this year could be another dampener. Going forward, if you look at it from purely a GST perspective, the benefits of that could possibly be seen in the next one, two or three years. There is nothing in the immediate run for any company or any sector to benefit. Consumption in general should benefit but you would not see that in this quarter.Whether Idea-Vodafone or Bharti-Tata, I am fairly negative on telecom sector consolidation. I do not think will help this sector because they were struggling in a very difficult scenario where the business model itself is not doing well. If at all, DTH could bring in some benefit for the two companies.Rather than telecom mergers, the other merger people are talking about is the IDFC-Shriram group merger. I have IDFC Bank in my portfolio. We have recommended this to our clients and so this is a very interesting development for us. We like IDFC Bank as a standalone company and I think there should be some premium. If right now one were to look at obviously the markets have close for trade this week but IDFC Bank is a stock that you could still add because of this merger does happen. I think there would be a fair amount of premium going into just that one IDFC Bank for the way they have improved upon their NPAs in the previous quarter and the way they were expanding, they have really expanded a lot over the last two-three quarters. If that deal happens, that is something we are closely watching and as I said we still have IDFC Bank in our portfolio and at the price at which it is available, it still a strong buy from our side. Reliance is a stock that we have recently added and I will say that I am not so excited about Reliance because of Jio. But I think on a lot of the other things, there is a lot going on for the company so long as crude prices remain where they are, the refining margins could keep looking positive, They have recently got into cool bid methane production from the MP the Phulpur plant and I think that technology wise, the next big thing is happening in the western in US in particular.A lot of analysts seem to be missing out on that aspect. In fact, on Jio and telecom as a sector I am fairly negative but I think their refining margins and their petrochemical margins could look really robust so that is the stock you could look at buying right now.
