TIRUPUR: Global buyers are regularly calling suppliers in the buzzing town of Tirupur, India’s biggest knitwear hub that boasts Rs25,000 crore exports every year. International callers, familiar with GST benefits, are very clear about what it means for them. “They want a cut in prices,” says S Sakthivel, secretary of the Tirupur Exporters Association. The knitwear industry is clear about long-term benefits, but Sakhtivel also has other callers: Exporters want details about tax implications for the industry that has numerous workers and units involved in different parts of the chain such as printing, embroidery, washing, dyeing etc, which are taxed at 18%, while jobs related to yarn and fabric enjoy a 5% rate. They are still coming to terms with the new system. “We are caught between buyers and suppliers not knowing what to do,” he rues although the industry is cautiously optimistic about GST. In the southern states, the optimism is shared by many. Several businesses in Kerala are happy as they depend on other states for supply of many consumer goods, poultry, cosmetics and other items; pump manufacturers in Coimbatore, the country’s biggest hub of the industry, are happy their tax rates haven’t changed much and all firms are gaining from easier truck movement although they are concerned about the nitty-gritty of the new tax. At Tirupur, apart from the massive export orders, domestic knitwear sales amount to another Rs 12,000 crore. “Unlike for exports we don’t get input credit for domestic sales. So the 18% tax for job works will have to be borne by the manufacturer which naturally will raise the manufacturing cost and affect the fund flow. Unless all the works are brought under a single slab of 5%, we have no option but to pass it on to the consumer,” said Raja M Shanmugham, a leading exporter and the president of the association. Shanmugham says nobody has a clear picture of GST. “Our suppliers are confused. They approach us and when we need clarification we go to tax officials. But even they cannot give us the solution. They refer to the higher authorities,” he said. The industry has been expecting a sales boost after the GST for readymade garments below Rs 1000 was fixed at 5%, some are concerned about flood of imports. “Higher cost of Tirupur garments may make the big retailers to turn to cheaper ones from Bangladesh, which has already captured 25% of the market in the country,’’ says T R Vijayakumar, who heads CBC Fashion Asia Pvt.Ltd. The pump and motor manufacturers in Coimbatore are not unduly worried about GST as the 12 % and 18 % slabs for each are only 0.5% higher from before. Incidentally, Coimbatore accounts for 45% of total pumps and motor production in the country amounting to `3,500-4,000 crore yearly. The problem again is job works by vendors, which is taxed at 18%. “Though with a business below Rs20 lakh are exempted from GST. We insist they pay which can be later adjusted against input credit. Otherwise the reverse charge procedures are cumbersome,’’ says Jayakumar Ramdas, managing director of Mahendra Pumps. If the small units do not pay, then the manufacturers may turn to registered vendors.
KOLKATA: Big phone companies have asked their distributors to complete all pending registrations under the goods and services tax ( GST ) this week, warning that a failure to do so could invite government action, throw up legal complications, disrupt prepaid services business and hurt revenue in the July-September quarter. Third-largest carrier, Idea Cellular is learnt to have set a July 10 deadline for its distributors to conclude GST registrations, while No 2 carrier, Vodafone India, is believed to have told its battery of distributors to do the same this week and also ensure their partner retailers follow suit, as every link in the distribution cycle is legally bound to comply with GST, three executives in the know told ET. Telcos have told their distributors that if they fail to wrap up all pending GST registrations this week, it would become legally impossible for them to refill their talk-time balances, which would disrupt continuity of the prepaid services business, scuttle new activations and product launches, and in turn, hit revenues, the executives said. Telcos, their distributors and retailers were expected to wrap up GST registrations by July 1. “If the problem lingers for several weeks post-July 1, the immediate revenue hit for the telecom industry could be around Rs 130-140 crore per month during the September ’17 quarter,” a senior executive of a leading mobile carrier told ET. One of India’s biggest phone companies has asked all its distributors to get GST-registered immediately. “Legally, there are turnover-based exemptions, but we would want all our distributors to be registered to simplify things,” a top executive of a Big 3 phone company told ET. Under GST rules, any business entity supplying goods and services with an annual turnover of Rs 20 lakh has to register, while the threshold is Rs 10 lakh for those operating in the Northeast. A senior executive of another Big 3 phone company said “our distributors have also been told to get cracking on registrations and also coax partner retailers to get GST-registered quickly as a retailer’s GST liability would come on the distributor if it fails to complete the registration process”. Though the situation has improved marginally over the past week, the level of pending registrations across the telco distributor/retailer fraternity on a national level remains sizeable. More than 90% of mobile phone users subscribe to prepaid services, which generate as much as 80% of telecom operators’ revenues. If distributors of such services fail to complete GST registration formalities, they will be unable to legally seek talk-time refills from telcos, and in turn, not be able to offer the same to partner retailers. If the retailers are unregistered, they too will be unable to sell prepaid recharge vouchers and top-ups to nearly a billion prepaid users. The GST registration woes come on the heels of telcos already under pressure amid intense competition and have sought incentives from the government to ease financial stress levels. Bharti Airtel , Vodafone India, Idea, Reliance Communications Reliance Jio Infocomm, Aircel and MTS India did not reply to ET’s queries at press time. Separately, telcos are also bracing for a negative impact on Ebitda — albeit limited — in the April-June ’17 period for having incurred one-time costs towards overhauling software/billing systems to ensure they were GST compliant from July 1. Experts reckon each pan-India operator has spent nearly Rs 50 crore on such systems reconfiguration, while smaller telcos have each shelled out Rs 20-30 crore for the same. Angel Broking fund manager and telecoms sector watcher, Mayuresh Joshi, however, feels these additional costs incurred for rejigging software/billing systems “will not make a material difference to telco Ebitda levels in the June quarter as these are one-time expenses of a non-recurring nature”.
A truck from Chennai to Jamshedpur carrying tyres made by Apollo Tyres reached in three and a half days as state border barriers began to be dismantled after the goods and services tax ( GST ) came into force on July 1. The same truck would have taken five days earlier. Many producers and transport operators are reporting logistics efficiency gains after states abolished border checkposts in the wake of GST, which promises one nation, one tax, one market. As many as 22 have removed barriers and others will do so soon. “The time has reduced by nearly 30% as there are no multiple check points and taxes,” said B Krishna Rao, category head at Parle Products. “The initial assessment from our logistics partner is that we are saving at least three days if not more in our supply chain. ”ET’s reporters fanned across the country to get a sense of how GST is playing out on the ground in terms of goods movement. But while there’s evidence of barriers going down, there is also enough indication that not all of officialdom seems to be on the same page. Regional Transport Office (RTO) employees are said to be stopping trucks and seeking monthly payments for various charges while mobile squads are making surprise checks and seeking payoffs. The inspector raj isn’t dead yet. Feedback Infra chairman Vinayak Chatterjee said the Centre must ask states to issue advisories directing various agencies not to misuse their authority. But there has been significant improvement in just about a week’s time. “We will see substantial improvement in efficiency of the logistics sector,” Chatterjee said. “The average truck speed is already up. More transparency will come with the E-Way bill ,” referring to documentation needed for crossborder movement for goods worth over Rs 50,000. Gagandeep Puri, an independent fleet owner of molasses tankers that operate in Uttarakhand, western Uttar Pradesh and Haryana said travel time is down. The tankers reach Odisha from Uttarakhand and Haryana in four days from five to six days.Trucks would otherwise spend hours at state borders, waiting to pay taxes, delays that encouraged corruption. Shipping minister Nitin Gadkari told ET last week that logistics costs should decline by at least 20%. According to a PhillipCapital study, logistics account for 14% of GDP in India compared with 8.5% for US. Those costs should come down as the ‘one nation, one market’ begins to take shape under GST. Mumbai-based DTS Translogistics Carriers said there has been a big difference in the time taken in transit after a carrier enters the city due to the removal of nakas. “Since 22 states have already dismantled border checkpoints, the time for the movement of the goods from point to point has come down significantly,” said Raghupati Singhania, vice-president, JK Organisation, which has interests in cement, tyres and paper. “Perhaps a better assessment can be made after a couple of months. ”Manufacturers said the logistics industry will be able to better utilise its assets and that should yield better rates. But these benefits of lower transport costs are yet to flow to them. “There will be savings in time and costs,” said a senior executive at a Delhi-based carmaker said. “But we have to wait and see if transporters reduce freight costs. ”Transporters want to see how business evolves. As many as 2.5 million trucks were off the roads, according to SP Singh, senior fellow at the Indian Foundation for Transport Research (IFTR). “Bookings have dropped by more than half in the first week of GST. By this time we would have sent out 10 carriers, but up till now the count is just two-three,” said an executive of DTS Translogistics Carriers. Aditya Agarwal of Kolkata-based Hari Om Freight Carriers said: “We are suffering from a loss of business as we deal with pharma and chemical manufacturers. They are not taking new orders and whatever old orders they had taken, they have postponed it by a period of 60 days as they do not have a GST number yet and are still trying to find a way around the transition into the new system under GST. ”Logistics companies want to see if gains persist as GST settles in. The initial decline in transport time could be simply because there is less traffic on the roads because of GST-related disruption. “We track movement of truckers on 75 routes,” said Singh of IFTR. “The speed and the trips of a few fleet owners have doubled because half the trucks are off road, not entirely because the check posts have been removed.” It is possible that some of these gains may be trimmed as traffic picks up. However, mobile squads are making spot cargo inspections and RTO employees are on the prowl as usual. Some transporters said vehicles are being stopped at state borders with RTO employees collecting various charges. “All sales tax-related activity has been eliminated since the implementation of GST. But RTOs are still collecting arbitrary amount from trucks, which clearly has no purpose,” said Ritesh Singh of Durga Transport Co based in Kolkata. Some officials are insisting on adherence to the rule that stipulates trucks should have two drivers. “The entire purpose of GST is defeated, if you look at the number of trucks stranded at state borders,” said Sohan Singh Aitiana, president of the Eastern Region LPG Bulk Transporters Association. “It is also affecting the supply chain. In Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh, the practice of charging a ‘mechanical’ fee is rampant. “This mechanical is out and out bribe, and is being collected in cash only. The receipts given to drivers are not stamped or signed, and even their colour changes every month...so how can we even call it legal?” said Aitiana. RTOs are said to be charging `1,300-3,500 per truck as such monthly fees. As long as such barriers remain, delays will persist, said a member of LPG transport association in eastern India who did not want to be named. Raghav Himatsingka of Truckola, a logistics aggregator, said he’s getting reports that kilometres travelled per day have gone up but RTO officials are still penalising drivers for reasons like improper footwear, clothing and other norm violations. Within a city, transport is still fraught with restrictions and impediments. “There is still congestion on roads, there are no-entry zones like Connaught Place in Delhi, Lutyens Zone that trucks can’t enter,” said Vineet Kanaujia, vice-president, marketing, Safexpress. Trucks in Delhi, the biggest market for cars, can only operate after 9.30 pm. “Even if the check posts are removed, the mobile checking squads are still there and these truckers are finding ways to strike deals with them to carry on their business as usual,” Singh said. Reported by Rajat Arora, Sharmistha Mukherjee, Vatsala Gaur, Sagar Malviya, Nishtha Saluja
NEW DELHI|WALAYAR: The goods and services tax has been a smooth ride for Gurbachan Singh, quite literally. His truck roars past most interstate borders, where he earlier spent five hours, at times a full day, at checkposts where a horde of petty government staff extorted cash on both sides and his idling engine guzzled fuel. The lorry driver is thrilled even though it’s still not a perfect ride. Business has fallen in the first few days of GST as businessmen come to terms with some lingering hurdles such as corrupt transport authorities, but on the whole, things are decisively better. “Checkposts were a source of great mental tension in addition to fatigue. Delhi to Mumbai used to take about three days. Now it can be done in two days. Life is much easier now except at the toll booths , where even the electronic toll collection is as slow as cash collection,” Singh said. At the Kerala-Tamil Nadu Walayar border checkpost, the long queues are gone. Vehicles smoothly drive past the dismantled barrier, where they previously crawled for hours. Saravanan, whose lorry ferries tur dal from Madhya Pradesh to Kochi, is happy he doesn’t have to waste hours to get approvals. “It reduces our total travel time. It’s a different story, though, for employees deployed at checkposts. “Around 150 personnel at Walayar checkpost who will be redeployed as field staff. They will do random checking. This may involve more work as we have to check vehicles, assess the weight of load, etc, in places where testing facilities may not be available,” said RS Manoj, inspecting assistant commissioner at the checkpost. Salman, a driver who brings goods from Chhattisgarh, says sales tax checkposts have gone, but “we still have to undergo checks by the RTO". For those who have adapted to the new system, the drive is effortless. “GST is the best thing that happened to India,” said Ravi Kumar, owner of two trucks that often drive between Sonepat and Rudrapur. Kumar has obtained the GST number with the help of his brother who is well versed in accounts and procedures. His drive is smoothened further by the fact that the company whose goods he is carrying is also GST compliant. Kuldeep Singh, driving from Nabha in Punjab to Guwahati, said ging through Uttar Pradesh had improved after Yogi Adityanath became chief minister and that GST had made it a breeze. “It took me 15 minutes to cross Shambhu barrier (Punjab-Haryana) from the usual five to 12 hours,” he said. The truckers’ gain, however, is a loss for small vendors and hawkers who did brisk business at choke points on highways. Bhura Singh, a tea stall owner, rues his daily sales drop from Rs 1,500 to Rs 600 since GST. “Truck movement is down. No one is buying cigarettes or pan masala as prices have increased”. Local business has also suffered with discontinuance of the sales tax checkpost at Walayar, with poor sales at pan shops and restaurants. “Business is down by half in the absence of truck drivers,” said K Babu, who owns a small tea shop. He had a restaurant nearby which shut down after demonetisation. Manoj, who prepares documents for truck drivers by typing out the declaration forms, feels he may have to shut shop soon too. “Once eway bill come into force, our job will become redundant.”
The first nine days of the Goods and Services Tax has been a mixed bag for industry: General optimism about the eventual gains from the reforms, some efficiency gains and worries about the transition, particular in industries which have scattered, unorganised sections in the value chain. GST has meant different things to different trades. In traditional industrial hubs like Bareilly where small and micro enterprises abound, entrepreneurs are looking for accountants to help them comply with GST on zari work and kite making, with some fearing that information about their wealth may leak to local goons. In India’s biggest knitwear hub of Tirupur, which boasts of annual exports of Rs 25,000 crore, foreign buyers are asking for price cuts after GST but local suppliers say input costs would rise. Some even fear imports would become cheaper. The most fierce opposition is from the textiles trade in Gujarat, where traders have refused to register with GST authorities and clashed with police during protests. But in Malegaon, the textiles trade is remarkably silent and playing a wait-and-watch game although it is as upset with GST as the agitating traders of Surat. For lorry drivers, it is an end to harassment at checkposts on state borders, but the staff of up to 150 at these posts has to be redeployed, while locals who sold tea, snacks and cigarettes at chokepoints on highways have lost business. ET reporters logged in to industrial hubs to get a feel of the GST rollout.
Talking to ET Now , Senior Fund Manager - Equities,, says 14-15% earnings growth is very much realistic number and we are in a for good times in equities. Edited excerpts :You are partly right. We have come out with this NFO after quite some time. But this product is very different from the products that we have till now. This is a product wherein a three-year close ended fund with largecap bias and the key differentiator is having a three-year put option to limit downside. This product is broadly aimed at two sets of investors. The first set of investor are those watching the market and waiting on the sidelines for the market to correct before investing. Through this product, he can actually invest straight away provided he is willing to pay 6% as a cost of the put option that we are buying. The second set of investor are those already invested in equities, maybe 10-20-30% of his surplus but the rest is still in fixed deposits, tax-free bonds, real estate gold and so many other classes and they have delivered returns in the last two-three years whereas equities have done very well. So he is keen to increase his allocation to equities but he is worried about the risk associated with equity product. Through this product he can increase that allocation in equities and at the same time, limit his downside. This is not a capital production product but this will limit the downside. Coming back to your point of 2007-2008, if you see, most of the money has actually gone into sectoral funds or more aggressive funds. Whereas in the last two years, though we have seen lot of inflows, I think most of the money coming into balance fund, ELSS kind of structure. This is where this product is referent and this time the investor expectations are I think much more rationale and realistic. Broadly this is going to be largecap oriented fund. Second, right now we are positive on three themes where I think we should expect good returns in the coming three years. First is corporate banks, second is capex linked stocks and third is companies that will benefit from the shift in unorganised to organised via GST. These are the broad three themes that we are betting on through this fund. No we will buy put option immediately and even the rest of the 94% would be deployed in a matter of about a month or so. Essentially I think you have to look at market in two ways. There is one set of investor who is looking at market, right now it is trading at about 19 times one year forward. So is it cheap? The answer is no, definitely it is not cheap. But is it expensive? I think it is not expensive either. We are somewhere in the middle zone. A 10-year average PE is about 15-16 and people would be happy to invest at 15-16 but the fact of the matter is given the three-five year structural positive that we are seeing for the economy and markets , I do not think we will see market getting cheaper. The second reason is one set of investors is focussing only on one year. There is another set of investor who is saying the market will do well over the next two-three yearsand whether economy will grow at 6-7%? The answer is yes. If yes, corporate earnings will they grow at 12% to 15%? I think answer to that also seems to be yes. If you see 15% earning growth for next three years, what we are seeing as 19 PE will come down to 13.5. We keep saying that equity is an asset class for the long term, not for a one year but a three to five year horizon. So if you have a three-year horizon, now market is at 13.5 times, so maybe first one year returns may not be that great. But when you have a three-year view, at 13.5 times, there is reasonable money to be made by investing in equity funds like this. No, as I said there are many investors who are worried that markets are at all-time high irrespective of the fact whether he is entering now or not. This is not aimed at the investor who is fully convinced about equities and willing to put 100% in equity diversified fund. Our first priority would be put money in diversified fund. But there is certain investor or certain class of investors who do not want this kind of volatility that one sees in equity product, that is where we are saying that over three year I will spend about 6%, which will limit my downside risk. We will have at given point of time. various types of investors. Someone who is hesitant, who is risk averse, can look at this product as because of the put option there is limited downside and at the same time, that 94% is fully invested in equities. He can ride the equity as equities go up and can participate fully from the equity upside. Historically though we have been positive and markets have delivered well, we have seen that for whatever reasons, markets can be volatile and correct and then people get jittery. This product is aimed at that category of investors. We are at the beginning of a good structural bull market. About earnings, I think if you see the fourth quarter numbers we have already seen a very good profit growth in fourth quarter. So earnings visibility is already seen. However, the first quarter is just over and second quarter that have just started will see some kind of aberration in these two quarter numbers, given the fact that GST is just getting implemented. So, there was a correction related to stock and destocking and one should not look too much at one or two quarter numbers given this background. But overall, if you see Bloomberg consensus estimates for this year, earnings growth is 16% and next year they are talking about 18%. One can clearly see that earnings growth is visible and it is not for one year. If the GDP economy grows at 7-8% and there is no reason to believe that corporates will not grow at 12-13% in the top line and in that scenario 14-15% earnings growth is very much realistic number. If that is the case, we are in a for good times in equities. Actually we are betting on the other side. We are saying that this time the recovery would be led by investment cycle and in fact private sector spending will still take some more time but public spending is where we are already seeing lot of action and I think we expect more action going forward. The government is clearly focussing on four sectors where we expect a significant surge in spending and growth in the coming years. The first is roads, second is railways, third is defence and fourth is housing. On all four segments, in housing, it has just started whereas in railways, roads and defence, we are already seeing reasonable traction in terms of spending and new ordering, new awards that are being placed. The next cycle we believe would be led more by spending. One, the stocks linked to capex, second corporate bank and third is companies that will benefit from this GST. As a result of this GST we think share of organised would see good increase in the coming one-two years per se at the cost of an organised sector. These are the three themes where one can expect a reasonable earnings growth. Consumption will take some more time we have seen in the last few quarters also overall volume growth is weak. I agree with you. We have both sets of companies -- one set of companies especially the MNC capital good companies, where we have seen a significant runup in stock price and PEs are very high. There may be returns in the near term which could be slightly lower but at the same time, within the infra, capital goods space there are quite a few companies trading at 15 times, 14 times one year forward. I do not think 14-15 is a very high PE. For PE rerating to happen, earnings growth is needed. That is where the job of fund managers like us will come in. Just going blindly in a sector is not enough, you have to do your due diligence, the expected earnings and the price you are paying. So, we have to do the job and then invest. Overall, there are enough opportunities but at the same time, as the market has done well in the last many months, some stocks have seen good rallies. We need to be careful about buying such companies but also one need to keep in mind we are not buying stocks with a six month or a three month view. We are buying stocks with a one to two years view. If earnings growth is going to be solid but if the stock is still available at a reasonable price, I may still add. There are enough opportunities in market but one needs to exercise caution and that is where equity mutual funds role come in. See it will not be radically different our top conviction bets that are there in our existing funds will get into this fund as well but as I was saying so this is going to be a large cap diversified equity fund invested in 94% in equities. That part is going to be similar versus our other diversified equity funds with some variation given what we like at this point of time. This 6% put option is a key differentiator of this fund. That that is what I want to highlight again. On pharma, we were never negative on the entire sector. It is always a stock specific a bottom up approach and so within pharma, we have been invested in a few stocks and we remain invested but overall, when you look at the large-caps, our issue was with the valuations a) stocks have run up ahead of their valuations and we could see the headwinds that are there that will have impact on the earnings. This along with the expensive valuation we stayed away from. It is very difficult to time the short term movement that we are seeing but directionally, is it fair to assume that the challenges are over? I think that is not correction and also that valuations are attractive at this point of time. I do not think they are attractive now versus where they were six months ago but still given the change in earnings growth trajectory, many of the large-caps are still not in attractive zone at this point of time. Defence is one interesting theme there is very little that has happened in India over the last 15-20 years, this government has cleared the project worth 5 lakh crore in the last three years whether it is Mr Jaitley or Mr Parikar. These need to be translated into awards that will happen over the next one to three years. More importantly, they have been talking about this Make in India and at least in defence we can clearly see government intent and focus on ensuring that whatever we procure, it is from India and it need not necessarily be a PSU or a private company it could be foreign company but they are saying that let us make it in India and we will see in two-three years’ time I think there could be significant change in this sector that is one sector one should be closely watching.
BAREILLY: In a small garments shop near Ghanta Ghar in the congested old city of Bareilly, a 25-year-old is wondering how to find a reliable accountant who will keep his mouth shut. He is not too worried about paying GST , or the need to hire an accountant for Rs 15,000 a month. He is more frightened at the thought of local goons getting to know how much he earns. “What if the accountant tells others about my daily income? It will be a big threat to me as anti-social elements can waylay me in evening when I am closing shop with my cash in hand,” he said. In manjha(kite string) city or zari nagri’s narrow Gali Arya Samaj, lined with glittering shops selling sarees lehengas and salwar suits, traders are trying to adjust to new billing and invoicing norms before they start placing orders with wholesalers again. Mahesh Uppal of Mahesh Embroidery, wholesaler of zari sarees, says retailers’ reluctance to place orders means that business worth Rs 15-20 lakh has been deferred. “There was no tax on sarees; now it is 5%. Customers will suffer. We are currently doing manual billing but will now have to keep a person to do accounting,” he said, while his six employees sat idle. In Bareilly’s Sahukara Sarafa Bazar, a famous jewellery hub, rains have not deterred customers from window shopping. Jewellers are not complaining about loss of business as hardly anybody buys jewellery at this time of the year, but the tax rankles. “Bareilly handcrafted jhumkawill become costlier as tax slab increases from 2% to 3%. Some people may do kutchabilling but they all know that GST, accounting and paperwork is the way ahead. There are lot of doubts and we are regularly meeting officials in the GST office on how to generate bills,” said Sandeep Agarwal, president, Bareilly Mahanagar Sarafa Association. Even the high-flying are down in the dumps. Inam Ali, a kite maker, is keeping his fingers crossed and is confident the government will make use of the additional tax revenue to help the common man. “We will now come under 5% tax slab. Earlier there was none. Government wants corruption to end, India to progress and we will have to go with the GST,” he said. Ali said kites were priced from Rs 1-4 each while a 500-m kite string was sold for Rs 40. “It is such a small commodity. Children come with a few rupees asking for kites. It will be bothersome but I have an accountant friend who will manage it (GST compliance).”
The government on July 8 launched the GST Rates Finder, but a complicated user interface and difficult navigation has left most users disappointed. According to Central Board of Excise and Custom (CBEC) chairperson Vanaja Sarna, the idea behind the app was that it would be a ready reckoner for the public, for customers, for consumers, traders, students, anyone who wishes to have very handily (GST) rates available. When you open the app, it is divided into five sections. The last two sections are of little utility and users are most likely to go tap on "Quick search". However, that is the section where most users are tripping. Many who downloaded the app were disappointed that most of their search queries did not result in any result. For example, a user who wanted to find the GST rate for a shoe, did not get any result. This is primarily because a shoe has been categorized as Footwear in the Schedule. If you do not know the correct term available in the schedule, it is likely you will not be able to find the rate. Similarly, another user in a Google Play Store review talked about not being able to find the rate for a Saree. The app in its current format has everything bunched up as Apparel, which is again divided into everything from 5 % - 28%. The problems users are facing is that commonly used words are missing from search, which means you have to know the word used in the Schedule. If you do not, one can try using synonyms to come up with the rates. Users have also complained that information is not available in Hindi. The App is divided further into Tax Rates: Goods and Tax Rates Service. If you click on a specific rate, say Goods @ 0%, it will throw up all items under this rate. However, if you use the search function here and say you search for Cashew, it will not give any result as Cashew is under the 5% GST rate and salted cashews under 12%. Interestingly, the app is still not available on the Apple Store. The App, however, makes it clear the information contained is a simplified representation of the complete Rules and Regulations for the guidance of the users. For complete information, the app tells users to visit the official website of CBEC.
NEW DELHI: Auto companies cut prices after the rollout of the goods and services tax (GST) on July 1, but Maharashtra raised the onetime registration levy for new private vehicles by two percentage points. Meanwhile, cinema theatres across Tamil Nadu stopped screenings for four days to protest against a 30 per cent local tax levied over and above 28 per cent GST . The strike was called off on Friday. Elsewhere across India, transport department officials have emerged as enforcers of a new inspector raj on the roads after sales tax checkposts disappeared, undermining the beneficial, common-market effects of GST by imposing new barriers and levying penalties in the name of rules they have ignored for years. More such levies and actions by state authorities could spoil the GST party, especially on the same goods or services that attract GST. Across the world, local levies continue after GST imposed but generally not on same transactions. GST may have subsumed as many as 17 central and state taxes and 23 cesses but there are enough items outside its purview still that can serve to offset the gains of this momentous reform. Entry taxes by municipal bodies, entertainment tax levied by local bodies, stamp duties, products such as alcohol and fuels, and electricity cesses are still not covered by GST. “While few levies and taxes by local bodies, entertainment tax, stamp duties etc are outside GST, we expected that states would not immediately resort to increasing these,” said Pratik Jain, leader, indirect tax , PwC. “It will impact consumer confidence at the time GST is just settling in. ”While some of these such as road tax and registration charges on vehicles can raise prices, the real damage will be from entry taxes imposed by municipal bodies. The Municipal Corporation of Delhi, for instance, imposes entry tax on commercial vehicles. Other municipalities could be similarly tempted to raise revenue through such means, impeding the smooth flow of traffic through their geographical boundaries. Worryingly, Maharashtra raised the levy on new vehicles when the GST law promises to make good any loss on account of GST to the states. Now new vehicles in the state could cost more than they did pre-GST. “States should let the benefits of GST reach consumers...They are equal if not greater partners in reform,” said a government official, adding that the Centre has already walked the extra mile to accommodate their concerns. States could be tempted to raise stamp duties, levy higher value-added tax (VAT) on fuel and alcohol and raise the electricity cess. More municipal bodies could impose taxes on the entry of commercial vehicles, creating high-tax islands even as state boundaries blur. Entertainment tax is another levy vulnerable to such action. “Ideally, we could have put everything in one basket, but India being a diverse country, it is something which was not possible,” said a senior government official, acknowledging the risk posed by this. “Those taxes are out of GST. States have got full powers to levy something on that or alter the rates of those taxes. If they are using that power and they think people can tolerate this extra taxation, then we cannot prevent that,” said the official. EY partner Bipin Sapra said: “Local levies in most international VAT jurisdictions are rarely on the same transaction on which VAT/GST is applicable. The very purpose of GST is lost if another non-creditable tax is levied on the same base.”
Prime Minister Narendra Modi has read out the Riot Act to India 's chartered accountants . He did so in an hour-long speech that he delivered at a ceremony marking the celebration of 'CA Day', which is on July 1, the anniversary of the establishment of The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). Although the PM said some nice pro-forma things about CAs, I do not recall any non-election speech of his that had so much bluntness and such thinly-veiled criticism of anyone. The exception would probably be his TV address announcing demonetisation , which makes sense because the underlying driver was the same on that occasion too. This speech received only cursory mention in the mass media, but has excited a lot of comment as well as consternation among CAs. During his address, the PM unambiguously laid his finger on the nation's CAs as the prime facilitators of black money generation. He made sharply mocking comments about how busy CAs were during the demonetisation period and how CAs cancelled expensive foreign holidays to work roundthe-clock, wondering what was it exactly that they were busy with. He then said, in a most threatening tone, that evidence against three lakh firms had been unearthed through data mining and that one lakh companies had been struck off the register of companies He wondered who could facilitate such activities and certified such companies' accounts?Twice during his speech he spoke about the inherent conflicts of interest in the ICAI's extensive powers. He said ICAI-made up and elected by CAs themselves--has the power to set the CA curriculum, conduct CA exams, certify CA's fitness to practice their profession, to judge whether they had committed any violations and then punish the guilty. Yet, only 25 CAs and been found guilty of malpractice in the past 11 years while 1,400 cases were pending. The most significant aspect of the speech was that both times he mentioned the ICAI's broad powers, he referred to them rather pointedly as granted by parliament. I'm sure ICAI's bigwigs present at the venue are wise enough to understand what Modi was reminding them of -if parliament can grant these powers, then it can take them away too. In times past, ICAI brass would have been right in ignoring such a speech. However, after demonetisation and GST , I think the man has demonstrated that in the battle to make rich Indian tax-thieves pay their share, he's not going to stop at any half-measures. India's CAs should ignore what Modi has said at their own peril. As an investment analyst, I have always despaired that in India, corporate balance sheets cannot be trusted because for a price, CAs will put their signature on any fiction. In fact, they help create the fiction. Not just that, helping businesses cheat on taxes is the main service many of them offer, something that the PM referred to in his speech. He spoke of how senior citizens who may invest their money in mutual funds or stocks could face losses because CAs do not use the power of their signature properly . The question is, how does the government intend to carry on this war? No one, least of all Modi, is naive enough to believe that an inspirational speech is all that will take for CAs turn straight. The first change needed is that CAs must be liable for what they do under real laws and the real legal process and not the mockery that the ICAI runs. However, a deep change is needed not just in the disincentives but also the incentives. The beneficiaries from truthful accounting are investors, banks, lenders and through taxation, the entire country. The beneficiary from dishonest accounting are the businesses themselves. But the CA is chosen by , and paid by , the business that is getting audited and will thus do what the business wants it to do. You cannot fight this. The right solution would be that CAs are randomly assigned to businesses every year by a transparent process. The struggle to fix the way India's accounting is done will be long one. Whenever you have an hour to spare, do go to bit. lymodi-ca and listen to this speech. If you are a CA, then don't wait for that spare time, listen to the speech right now, even though you won't enjoy it much.
Jewellers are unhappy about Kerala-based chain Malabar Gold & Diamond's decision of not charging goods and services tax from customers. Malabar Gold has decided to offer jewellery at prices that comprise the gold price plus the making charge. It will absorb the 3 per cent GST , though the tax will appear on the bill given to customers. "We have now decided to give this 3 per cent tax back to the consumers as discounts when they purchase gold from our showrooms. So, in effect, there will be zero GST burden on consumers and the price of gold also will come down marginally," Ahammed MP, chairman of Malabar Gold, told ET Till June 30, buyers in Kerala had to pay 5 per cent VAT - in other states, it was 1-1.2 per cent - and an excise duty of 1 per cent. Introduction of GST at 3 per cent, therefore, has made the metal cheaper. South India, led by Kerala, accounts for 40 per cent of India 's annual consumption of 850-950 tonnes of gold. Malabar Gold's decision has irked leading jewellers in Kerala, as such a discount by one large chain could hurt other players. Most of them, though, don't expect the offer to stay for long. Joy Alukkas, chairman of jewellery retail firm Joyalukkas, said: "This is detrimental to the industry as most of the jewellers will not be able to give such a big discount. At Joyalukkas, we are selling gold at 3 per cent GST since it was introduced on July 1. Consumers too will understand that GST is a must and therefore they will start buying. "Another senior Kerala-based jeweller, who did not wish to be named, said: "There is stiff competition among jewellers in Kerala and that is why they come up with alluring propositions to woo consumers. But these schemes are short-lived. "Jewellers in Maharashtra have raised questions about the sustainability of giving discounts on GST. "How long can this continue? I wonder whether there will be some impact on the profitability of the jeweller. However, we are asking for GST from customers," said Saurabh Gadgil, chairman, PNG Jewellers.
NEW DELHI: The Finance Ministry has said pre- goods and services tax sanitary napkins attracted a total tax of 13.68%, therefore were put in the 12% slab. It said reducing GST on sanitary napkins to nil would lead to complete denial of input tax credit to domestic manufacturers and put them at a disadvantage vis a vis imports as they would also face zero IGST Raw materials for manufacture of sanitary napkins attract GST of 18% of 12%, even with 12% GST on sanitary napkins, there in an inversion in the GST structure, it said. Though, within the existing GST law such accumulated ITC will be refunded, it will have associated financial costs [interest burden] and administrative cost, putting them at a disadvantage vis-à-vis imports, which will also attract 12% IGST on their imports, with no additional financial costs on account of fund blockage and associated administrative cost of refunds. If the GST rate on sanitary napkins were to be reduced from 12% to 5%, it will further accentuate the tax inversion and result in even higher accumulated ITC, with correspondingly higher finical costs on account of fund blockage and associated administrative cost of refunds, putting domestic manufacturers at even greater disadvantage vis-à-vis imports. "Reducing the GST rate on sanitary napkins to Nil, will however, result in complete denial of ITC to domestic manufacturers of sanitary napkins and zero rating imports. This will make domestically manufactured sanitary napkins at a huge disadvantage vis-à-vis imports, which will be zero rated ," it said.
Under the recently implemented GST regulation , export invoice has to mention either "Supply meant for Export on Payment of IGST " or "Supply meant for Export under bond without payment of IGST" meaning thereby that export cannot be done without following any of the two ways of raising export invoice. Any registered person availing the option to supply goods or services for export without payment of integrated tax shall furnish, prior to export, a bond or a Letter of Undertaking. This bond or Letter of Undertaking is required to be furnished in Form GST RFD-11 on the GST common portal. This form, GST RFD 11, will be filed with a bank guarantee equivalent to the amount of IGST. Furnishing a bond is in a way putting conditions for export of services. Instead of promoting exports, this ambiguity may put brake on export of services or can cause undue litigation. In comparison, during pre-GST regime, export of services was exempt, which meant export was permitted without payment of any duty. A benefit of input service tax refund was also available. Other exporters were either exporting excisable or non-excisable goods. In case of exports of non-excisable products, exporters were eligible to claim refund of Input VAT credits. In case of exports of excisable products, exporters were eligible to claim refund of excise and Input VAT credits. Besides, duty drawback claim was also available. Further, filing of bond or undertaking in mandatory along with bank guarantee for any export of services. The question now is why has the government introduced unnecessary filings when the objective was to ensure ease of doing business in India?Exports have been defined under "zero rated supply" meaning that tax rate on export of goods and services will be zero. While one section is categorizing exports rate at zero, another section 3(5) states that transaction of export will be subjected to IGST, which is even zero rated supplies of services are subject to IGST, first. Though intention of Government is ease of doing business in India and promoting export of Indian goods and services, this step of applying IGST of exporters, intentionally or unintentionally, needs consideration. Over many years, every Indian government has focused on strengthening and promoting exports and on foreign investments by easing rules. This ambiguity may lead to restricting exports of services to significant level from the present levels. There appears to be serious dichotomy between intention and wordings of GST as far as export of services are concerned. The sooner it is clarified, the better for service exporters. The writer is Partner Tax & Regulatory Services at the chartered accountancy firm, Puneet Puri & Company (PPC) .
NEW DELHI: India's central drug regulator, Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), has clarified that pharmaceutical companies can re-label old stocks of their medicines with the revised Maximum Retail Prices (MRP) applicable following implementation of the Goods and Service Tax GST ) regime. "...subject to provisions of Legal Metrology Act & Rules and other provisions of Act and Rules relating to Goods and Service Tax, this office has no objection for alteration of label (stickering) by the manufacturers under rule 104A of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, if required for implementation of GST," stated the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation in a notification on Monday evening. The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution last week stated in a circular that manufacturers, packers and importers of pre-packaged commodities should declare the post GST MRPs of unsold stocks which were manufactured, imported or packed before July 1. So far, chemists had been selling old stocks of medicines at their pre-GST MRPs and pharma companies were expected to declare the new MRPs on the batches they manufactured after July 1.
