PUNE: Godrej Locking Solutions and Systems , has announced that it would be passing the benefit of GST to the consumers by suitably revising its wholesale and retail prices across the country. Post GST, a major category of locks has come down to 18%. In a country, where over 60% of the locking solutions market is unorganized; this move will help branded lock manufacturers as price has been one of the key factors influencing the purchase decision. The decision is especially beneficial for the customers in the Tier 2 and 3 markets. Godrej Locking Solutions and Systems expects small towns to account for 5-10 per cent of its sales this fiscal and believes the share can double by 2020. Shyam Motwani, Executive Vice President and Business Head in Godrej Locking Solutions and Systems, said “GST is a landmark move towards one nation, one tax initiative. The locks category will now attract 18% GST. This is a positively beneficial move for the industry. We expect demand for branded locks to increase in the near future. Godrej Locking Solutions and Systems will be passing the benefits to their customers by suitably revising its wholesale and retail prices across the country. ”The locking solutions market in India is worth Rs 4000 crore. Godrej Locks commands 45 per cent share of the organized locks market.
MUMBAI: The big utility vehicles (UVs) have become the biggest beneficiary under GST, the big SUVs have become attractive by 7-12% depending on the State. And timing it to perfection, some half a dozen high profile SUV (sport utility vehicle) launches are planned in the second half of 2017. In a highly competitive environment, the lower GST (Goods and Services Tax) will enable these companies to price their product aggressively and take the share of utility vehicle segment beyond 25%. The new launches include Chrysler Jeep Tata Nexon , Mahindra’s global MPV designed out of North America Technical Centre and a rugged 7 seater SUV, which may offer higher acceptance in the rural areas. Maruti Suzuki will be launching the facelifted S Cross. At the premium end of the market, Skoda will launch the Kodiaq SUV, Mercedes Benz has a new version of GLC coming up and BMW will be launching the new X3. Pawan Goenka , MD at the largest utility vehicle maker Mahindra and Mahindra said the correction in rates for SUV was long overdue, as the segment was selectively being levied with higher rates. As against 24% excise duty for mid-size sedans, the tax on SUV was spiked to 30%, on constant pleas from the vehicle makers the industry was assured that this abnormality will be corrected with GST. “In some sense we have a level playing field now, which was tilted against SUV. With this correction, our SUVs like XUV becomes more competitive and attractive when compared to a sedan in the same price bracket as the relative tax difference between large sedan and large SUV has come down, which may see some shuffle,” said Goenka. The Indian utility vehicle segment has been the fastest growing segment in the passenger vehicle space. Led by Maruti Suzuki Vitara Brezza and Hyundai Creta, the utility vehicle segment grew by a whopping 30% in FY17 and accounted for almost a fourth of the overall passenger vehicle market. Experts said the Indian utility vehicle segment is set to cross 1 million unit annual sales mark in the domestic market within the next couple of years itself. According to Gaurav Vangaal, Senior Analyst for forecasting at IHS Markit, the utility vehicle segment will cross the production milestone of 1million this year itself, with the likes of EcoSport and Creta SUVs are exported in larger numbers from India to other emerging markets. “SUVs world over are the fastest growing segment and India is not behind. With the tax reforms, the segment has become more attractive, that not only allows vehicle makers to price their vehicles more attractively for domestic market, but the lower tax means as a manufacturing base India becomes more competitive and it allows global companies to use the country as a manufacturing base, which has already become large, thanks to Eco-Sport and Creta,” added Vangaal.Mayank Pareek, president for passenger vehicle division at Tata Motors said the company can’t comment on the pricing but assures that the Nexon SUV will be competitively priced much like its previous products. Pareek said with the evolution in the industry, the market is maturing and as a result sub segments are emerging.
NEW DELHI: GST has come out all guns blazing. Under the new tax regime, shotguns, rifles and bullets are cheaper, giving a shot in the arm to weapons dealers across the country as well as their high-profile customers. “Big business houses, film industry and industrialists have been making queries. We are waiting for the ordnance factories to announce new prices,” Hanif Bandukwala, Mumbai-based dealer and retailer who owns Bansons said. Security agencies and banks are other customers who will gain, apart from big farmers who use weapons to ward off stray animals from their fields and goons from their homes. Politicians are also among the people who may keep personal weapons While dealers like Bandukwala are likely to gain, dealers have a problem selling guns in the biggest potential market , Uttar Pradesh. The Allahabad High Court banned fresh licences four years ago because it turned out that the 2.15 lakh guns with the state police were heavily outnumbered by private licences that were more than 11lakh. The court said the state was sitting on a volcano. Maharashtra are the biggest markets for the arms and ammunition industry which is around Rs 200-250 crore. It is growing 2% a year, according to the All India Arms Dealers Association that represents 4,000 dealers in the country. “Rifles and guns will be cheap by 9%, while prices of revolver and pistol will go up,” says Charan Pal Singh Ghei, chairman of the association. Rifles, in which the barrel is grooved to make the bullet spin, and other shotguns account for 90% of the Indian market while smaller handguns make up the rest. Bandukwala said customers generally prefer Indian guns as new ones are generally available unlike foreign weapons that are mostly 10-20 years old. Ghei said the popular 12-bore gun, which costs about Rs 20,000, will now sell for about Rs 18,000 while the 315-bore rifle will fall to about Rs 55,000 from the earlier price tag of up to Rs 60,000. Under GST, the government has kept pistol, revolver under 28% tax slab and guns and rifles under 18%. “Earlier, we were paying 12.5% VAT, 2% central state tax and 12.5% sales tax for guns, revolvers, pistols and rifles,” informs Ghei. Harjeet Bindra of Bindra Armoury in Bareilly district of Uttar Pradesh said that farmers in the hinterland of the state are the biggest buyers of arms. “The law and order situation in these areas is so bad that it is not safe to venture out after sundown. With the police station far off, one can’t rely on their assistance and hence it is necessary to keep guns and rifles,” he said. In UP, state taxes were the highest at 21% apart from the 12.5% VAT and 1% other taxes. Bindra added that the industry will benefit more if the government started issuing fresh licences. Jodhpur-based New Light Art Works, which is one of the 100 private companies given licence by the government to manufacture guns, said that lower tax would encourage investment in the sector. “Orders have slowed down since June as the industry was waiting for the new tax slabs. In a month, I sell 125-200 guns to arms dealers. Till date in July, I have sold 25 and expect a pickup in demand,” said 78-year-old Vijay Singh Bhati who sells guns under the ‘Óm VSB’ brand.
NEW DELHI: The government has said free food supplied in anna kshetras (food areas) run by religious institutions is exempt from GST. Besides, prasadam distributed by places of worship like temples and gurudwaras would not attract any GST. Clarifying media reports that suggested GST would be levied on free food supplied in anna kshetras , the finance ministry said in a statement that “this is completely untrue. No GST is applicable on such food supplied free. ”However, some inputs and services required for making prasadam are subject to GST. These include sugar, edible vegetable oil, ghee, butter and transportation of these goods. The ministry said most of these inputs or input services have multiple uses and under the GST regime, separate tax rates can’t be prescribed depending on the purpose for which sugar is supplied. GST being a multi-stage tax, it is difficult to administer exemptions and concessions based on end-use and no such incentives are envisaged under the new tax regime, the ministry said. “It would, therefore, not be desirable to provide end-use based exemption for inputs or input services for making prasadam or food for free distribution by religious institution.”
The government on Monday said gifts up to Rs 50,000 per year by an employer to his employee will be outside the ambit of the goods and services tax ( GST ) while free membership of a club, health or fitness centre will not come under the new tax regime. The finance ministry also said free housing to employees, when it is provided in terms of the contract between the employer and employee and is part of the cost-to company will not be subject to GST. “It is being reported that gifts and perquisites supplied by companies to their employees will be taxed under GST. However, gifts of value more than Rs 50,000 made without consideration are subject to GST, when made in the course or furtherance of business,“ the finance mini stry said in a statement. Stating that gift has not been defined in the GST law, the ministry said in common parlance, gift is made without consideration, is voluntary in nature and is made occasionally. “It cannot be demanded as a matter of right by the employee and the employee cannot move a court of law for obtaining a gift,“ it said. On the issue of taxation of perks, the ministry said services by an employee to the employer in the course of or in relation to his employment is outside the scope of GST (neither supply of goods or supply of services). “It follows there from that supply by the employer to the employee in terms of contractual agreement entered into between the employer and the employee, will not be subjected to GST,“ the statement clarified. It also said that the input tax credit (ITC) scheme under GST does not allow ITC of membership of a club, health and fitness centre. “It follows, therefore, that if such services are provided free of charge to all employees by the employer then the same will not be subject to GST, provided appropriate GST was paid when procured by the employer,“ the statement added. Experts said the clarification by the ministry puts several issues at rest that the industry was worried about. It has been clarified that anything done by employer for employee in terms of employment contract will not be subject to GST. These should include benefits offered in terms of providing cars for official use, free meals, gym and such other amenities provided to employees as part of a employment contract. Therefore, GST will have to paid only in exceptional situation where gifts are given on voluntary basis, such as Diwali gifts to employees and that too if the value is more than Rs 50,000,“ said Pratik Jain, partner and leader indirect tax at consultancy firm PwC India.
NEW DELHI: Rental income from residential property has been exempt from GST but any earning over Rs 20 lakh annually from renting or leasing for commercial purposes would attract the levy. Revenue Secretary Hasmukh Adhia said that if the house property is rent out for shop or office purpose, no Goods and Service Tax (GST) will be levied up to Rs 20 lakh. "Rental income received from residential house is exempt. But if you have given your unit to commercial enterprise, then it is taxable if you are getting more than Rs 20 lakh as rent," Adhia said at the GST Master Class. The taxpayer earning more than the exempted threshold will have to register with the GST Network and pay taxes. GSTN Chief Executive Prakash Kumar said that as many as 69.32 lakh registered excise, service tax and VAT payers have migrated to the GSTN portal. There are over 80 lakh such assessees in the earlier indirect taxation regime. Out of the 69.32 lakh, as many as 38.51 lakh have completed the entire registration process and registration certicate is being issued to them. The remaining 30.8 lakh taxpayers are being sent SMS and emails by GSTN so that they complete the registration process by giving the details of the business like main place of business, additional place of business, promoters details. Besides, over 4.5 lakh new assessees have registered on the GSTN portal since June 25. Adhia further said that the facility to amend the details of businesses provided to the GSTN portal at the time of registration will open on July 17. Also, registration for GST practioners will open on the same day. Besides, cancellation of registration can be done online.
Anticipations from over a decade were put to rest on July 1 when India's biggest tax reform since independence, "Goods and Services Tax"(GST) was launched. With the introduction of GST , multitude of taxes have now been subsumed into one single tax, which will not only give a boost to the economy but will also bring about transparency and create self-disciplined tax ecosystem. With an intent to give impetus to forex reserves of the country, Government has been regulating the export-import policy and has introduced various schemes for promoting exports of both goods and services. Special Economic Zones (SEZ) and Export Oriented Units ( EOUs ) schemes are also part of this export promotion strategy. A SEZ is a specified demarcated duty-free territory, which for the purpose of trade operations is deemed to be considered outside the customs territory of India. Set up primarily to promote exports, even GST regime continues to incentivize SEZ units by extending due benefits for their authorized operations. A SEZ is required to follow two separate set of compliances. Firstly compliances governed by the SEZ Act, 2005, such as submission of periodical progress reports and secondly, compliances required to be undertaken in terms of indirect tax laws. While the former are likely to continue without any major changes, the latter would now be modified in line with the GST law. Till now GST regime has been a mixed bag for SEZ sector. On one hand, under GST regime, registration rules have mandated SEZ to take separate registration, since it is considered as a separate business vertical. Apparently, this will result into increased compliance and record maintenance burden on sectors having multiple SEZ units. On the other hand, industry has welcomed GST lawmaker's decision to keep all the supplies made to a SEZ as "zero rated". While all export of goods/ services and supplies of goods/ services made to a SEZ are chargeable to IGST , however, these supplies shall be treated as zero-rated supplies under GST. Resultantly, the suppliers making any supply to SEZ will have two options, either, not charge any Integrated GST (IGST) to SEZ and supply under a cover of bond/letter of undertaking and file refund claim of corresponding Input Tax Credit ( ITC ); or charge IGST on its supply, pay it and then claim refund. Also, unlike previous regime, the onus of filing refund has been shifted from SEZ units to the suppliers. Therefore, the SEZ units would not be required to go through the hassles of claiming refund for supplies which did not enjoy upfront exemption. However, there is no clarity for reverse charge transactions wherein, the liability to pay GST would be on the service recipient. In such case, it needs to be ascertained whether the SEZ unit is required to pay tax and then claim refund. Further, any procurements (of raw material, goods or services) made by SEZ from outside India for its authorized operations have been exempted from Basic Customs Duty ( BCD ) & IGST both. With regard to outward supply made by a SEZ unit, if a SEZ unit makes any domestic clearances (i.e. within India), the customer will be required to file a bill of entry (BoE), pay BCD and IGST on the transaction and report it as a part of his inward supply as imports. Alternatively, if SEZ make domestic clearances without the cover of BoE, such transactions will be required to be reported by SEZ as its outward supply. In relation to the EOUs, all imports and domestic procurements are duty free. Under GST regime also it has been clarified that EOUs are allowed to import goods for the authorized operations without paying BCD. But such goods would suffer IGST and applicable cesses. In respect of indigenous procurements, the taxes so paid will be available as input tax credit (ITC) to EOUs and refund of the same can be claimed after exports. Furthermore, to create a level playing field for domestic players, if an EOU makes domestic clearances, they will have to pay amount of BCD exemption benefit availed on imported inputs which were used in such domestic clearances. It is therefore apparent that SEZ units would largely enjoy a status quo in GST as far as the various exemptions and benefits are concerned. Saloni Roy is Senior Director, Anjana Verma is Manager and Manvi Sharma is Deputy Manager with Deloitte Haskins and Sells LLP
For one, let me come out of the corporate closet. As far as goods and services tax GST ) goes, I sincerely believe that the “one nation one tax” regime may benefit India in the long run. Now with a hope that my assertions may not be construed as politically motivated: let’s discuss what a recent press information bureau statement said: “that GST in fact doesn’t increase tax rate on sanitary napkins. ”The press note in question: issued on July 10 in the first line goes on an offensive. “There are some remarks made by various column writers on GST rate on sanitary napkins…” While I quite agree that most of those who are criticising (or for that matter praising) GST on Facebook and Twitter may not be able to answer two simple questions about the tax regime; these critiques may be right this time around. The press note goes on to attack the critiques of GST: “It may be mentioned that the tax incidence on this item before and after GST is the same or less. ”The press release claims that since tax rate on the product was already 13.68% (“excise duty of 6% and 5% VAT”). So the GST rate at 12% is absolutely justified. Sounds like a sound argument? Don’t rush. The press note claims that some of the “major raw materials” used to manufacture sanitary napkins already attract high GST rate (18% and 12% respectively). So basically if the raw materials attract high tax rate how could you expect the final product to be taxed at a much lesser rate?Before we go further: remember this fact: tax rate on the product was about 6% across India. The VAT on the product was not applicable across India, but a handful of the states. So basically, the tax rate on the product has gone up from 6% earlier to 12% under GST in most states. As many of you may know: there is a concept called weighted average. So while on the face of it may sound just right the problem is: the GST rates of raw material that have increased (Super Absorbent Polymer, Poly Ethylene Film, LLDPE– Packing Cover, Glue at 18% and o Thermo Bonded Non-woven, Release Paper, Wood Pulp at 12%) is only about 20% of the total cost. About 80% of the total cost of a sanitary napkin is cotton. The tax rate on which is 5% even under GST. So the government’s argument around “an inversion in the GST structure” may not hold water. There is a simple solution, if anyone in the government is listening. Differential tax rates on the packages. So the GST rate on a pack of 10 sanitary napkins may differ depending on the price. So maybe if the price is Rs 100 GST could be 5%, if the price is Rs 500 then GST could be 18%. The government has already done this in some categories. Footwear being a prime example: where GST on below Rs 1,000 chappal and others is different. Most of the sanitary napkins bought in rural or by lower income group are the less pricier ones. While urban rich (South Mumbai/South Delhi) tend to buy the expensive ones. Surveys after surveys say that most of the consumption of sanitary napkins happen only in urban and semi urban areas. While this may be true. The question one may want to ask is: whether we want this to continue or we want most of our Indians to have access to affordable hygienic products?(Sachin Dave is a Senior Assistant Editor with The Economic Times and writes on corporate finance and taxation. Views expressed are personal)
