NEW DELHI: Toyota’s Indian unit said on Tuesday that it would continue to sell hybrid vehicles locally despite the increase in taxes on this category of cars under the single producer levy, the GST N Raja, director, at Toyota Kirloskar Motor (TKM), said: “We continue to be positive on hybrids irrespective of the price challenge. There is no change in our plan. We will continuously engage with the government and explain to them. We are hopeful that the government would reconsider it positively. ”The company had previously indicated it may re-evaluate its strategy on hybrid vehicles after an effective tax of 43% has been levied (28% GST, 15% cess). By contrast, smaller petrol and diesel vehicles would attract levies in the range of 29-31%. Raja added: “We sold 1,300 units of the Camry in 2016. As much as 95% of them were hybrids. We will continue to sell the Camry hybrid as we feel the customer profile in the segment will not be affected with an increase of Rs 3 lakh. Most of them are CEOs, CFOs and businessmen. Moreover, they all want to try out a new technology and are conscious environmentally. ” TKM has already sold around 600 hybrids between January and June this year. Given the price increase, the company said it might have to make more efforts toward educating customers on the technology. The company would push sales in markets such as Maharashtra, where the price increase on the Camry hybrid has not been as much as compared to that in Delhi after GST was rolled out July 1. Overall, the company said the tax rates under GST have enabled manufacturers to reduce prices of petrol and diesel vehicles.
BHOPAL: Family outing on dinner once a week at a decent city hotel was a routine for Sunil Kumar Batra, a senior executive with a private company posted in the state capital. But, after the new tax regime under Goods and Service Tax GST ) was rolled out on July 1, he is thinking twice before stepping out with family for dining. There are many people in the city like Batras, who are yet to come to terms with the new tax regime and have cut down their visits to the favourite restaurants and hotels. Thus, the losers are the medium class hotels. Business of these hotels has been hit by more than 25% post GST regime. Though, it is too early to reach a conclusion, but hoteliers say the initial trend during the first fortnight is disturbing. A hotel operator said the MAJOR problem is that some of our regular customers are missing. On the other hand, the top end hotels are not much affected as the gentry that visits there does not care much if they have to shell out an additional Rs 250-Rs 500 per visit. An executive of Jehanuma Palace Hotel said, “People coming to our hotel won’t mind coughing out that extra bucks for good food . ”Earlier, in medium class hotels, the food was taxed at a rate of about 11% - that included 5 % VAT and 6% service tax after some rebate. But now the food has been taxed at a flat rate of 18%. Now, a dal fry or butter chicken would have three tax rates in the same market. Hotels with a turnover up to Rs 20 lakh are not taxed, those upto Rs 75 lakh would have to pay just 1% tax and beyond that 18%, a hotel owner explained. “Rate of these stuff would have varied otherwise also depending upon the hotel class, but why tax them differently?,” he asked. The GST is all set to affect the wedding business in the coming winters. Booking inquiries have shown that higher tax slabs are putting off people. Harvinder Singh, owner of Amer Greens told TOI, “GST has disturbed the budget of the people for big banquets. Inquiries suggested that people may now start preferring caterers over hotel parties.”
NEW DELHI: Swedish auto manufacturer Volvo Cars today said it will continue to push for hybrid and electric vehicles in India despite disappointing high tax rate on such vehicles under GST The company -- which had last week announced that from 2019 all its new models will have an electric motor, putting an end to cars that only have an internal combustion engine (ICE) -- also said it would try to bring such new vehicles to India as soon as possible after global launches. "Yes, I am bit disappointed with the high GST rate on hybrid vehicles as it is not in line with the government's push for environment friendly vehicles," Volvo Auto India Managing Director Tom von Bonsdorff told PTI. Under the new tax regime, hybrid vehicles are on the same slab as luxury cars at 28 per cent GST plus 15 per cent cess at present. At 43 per cent, total tax incidence on these vehicles is higher from the previous effective tax rate of 30.3 per cent."This does not change our commitment to eco-friendly vehicles and to develop hybrid and electric vehicles. We, however, hope that the government will have a rethink on the tax rats on hybrids in order make them more affordable," he said. When asked if Volvo Cars will launch hybrid or electric vehicles in India, in line with the global announcement from 2019, Bonsdorff said, "We will try to bring them as soon as possible in India after the global launch". Volvo Cars had announced that it would launch five fully electric cars between 2019 and 2021, three of which will be Volvo models and two high performance electrified cars from the stable of its performance car arm, Polestar. All these five cars will be supplemented by a range of petrol and diesel plug in hybrid and mild hybrid 48 volt options on all models, the company had stated. Expressing optimism on electric cars, Bonsdorff said: "The government's plans to have an all-electric car fleet by 2030 goes in hand with Volvo Cars' global vision. We are looking forward to that direction". The company already sells its plug-in hybrid SUV XC90 Excellence in India priced at Rs 1.28 crore. Volvo Auto India today launched an all-new version of its crossover model V90 Cross Country priced at Rs 60 lakh (ex-showroom). The model is powered by a twin-turbo diesel engine that delivers power of 235 hp coupled with an 8-Speed gearbox with paddle shifts. It is also equipped with radar-based safety features such as lane keeping-aid, collision warning with full auto-braking for pedestrians, cyclists, other vehicles and large animals. The new vehicle also has blind-spot detection with cross traffic alert, rear collision warning and park pilot assist features. "The car has remarkable off-road performance, on-road comfort and luxury. It is designed for Indian road conditions and is in sync with the new-age luxury customer's lifestyle of seeking a weekend escape," Bonsdorff said.
Premium on gold has disappeared since the beginning of this month even as banks and nominated agencies are importing the precious metal in limited quantities, indicating that jewellers have unsold gold with them and demand has slowed since the GST regime was rolled out on July 1. In the last week of June, dealers were charging a premium of up to $10 an ounce over official domestic prices, the highest since the middle of November 2016. There are three reasons for the disappearance of premium on gold, said industry executives. First, rural demand has fallen to less than half as kharif sowing has picked up across India with the onset of monsoon Second, in urban India there are few buyers of jewellery now as the wedding season is yet to arrive. Investment demand for gold in urban India is expected to be met by the sovereign gold bonds 2017-18 (series-II) launched on Monday. Surendra Mehta, national secretary, India Bullion and Jewellers Association said, "Ample im ports took place before June 30, that is in the VAT regime. That volume is good enough to meet the demand. "India's gold imports in terms of quantity in the first half of 2017 crossed the enti re imports of 2016. Although physical demand for gold dwindled since 3 per cent GST was introduced, the industry expects the new tranche of so vereign gold bonds to fare well. Shekhar Bhandari, business head (global transactions and precious metals) at Kotak Mahindra Bank said, "The issue price is fixed at 2,780gm of gold, ` which is 2 per cent less than the prevailing market price. Additionally, whoever subscribes for sovereign gold bond will not have to pay 3 per cent GST, as it is paper gold."
