NEW DELHI: The first set of numbers after the rollout of the goods and services tax should calm any jitters about its prospects. Integrated goods and services tax ( IGST ) collections on imports in the first 10 days of the new regime crossed Rs 4,000 crore, in line with expectation and suggests that the rollout has been largely smooth. “Collections would have crossed Rs 4,000 crore...Data is pouring in and final tabulations will be available in some time,” a senior government official told ET. These collections exclude levies on petroleum and natural gas products, which aren’t covered by GST in any case. Besides, the final numbers will include collections from manual filings. GST came into effect July 1. In July 2016, total customs collections amounted to Rs 16,625 crore, which on average yields Rs 5,360 crore for the 10 days, but that includes basic customs duty . The Rs 4,000 crore of IGST does not include customs duty. “On the face of it, the pace of collections looks usual,” the official said. A detailed analysis will be carried out at the end of this month when more complete data will be available. Collection of IGST on imports started at midnight on rollout day as the levy became payable soon after goods entered the country unless specifically exempted. IGST on imports has replaced countervailing duty (CVD), levied in lieu of excise duty, and special additional duty (SAD). IGST is the sum of central GST and state GST levied on a local product and is in addition to the basic customs duty. It is administered by customs officials. CVD and SAD formed part of customs collections until now. The government has also done away with a number of CVD exemptions that were available in the previous regime, such as that on some electronic products. GST replaces multiple state and central taxes such as central excise duty, service tax , CVD, valueadded tax, octroi and purchase tax with a single levy to create a seamless national market in the country. As many as 17 taxes and 23 cesses have been folded into one levy.
NEW DELHI: Selling old jewellery or bullion will attract 3% Goods and Services Tax on the value realised, revenue secretary Hasmukh Adhia has said. But if the jewellery is sold and new one is bought out of the proceeds, then the 3 % tax paid will be deducted from the GST payable on buying new jewellery. “Supposing I am a jeweller. Somebody comes to me with old jewellery, it is as good as buying gold. You can later claim input tax credit ," he said at the GST Master Class. Explaining further Adhia said a jeweller buying old jewellery from someone will charge 3% GST under reverse charge. So, if old jewellery worth Rs 1 lakh is sold, a GST of Rs 3,000 will be deducted, he said. “If the proceeds from the old jewellery is used for buying new jewellery, the tax paid on sale will be adjusted against GST on the purchase,” he said. However, if an old jewellery is given to the jeweller for some modification, then it would be considered as job works and 5% GST would be levied on the charges. “But, if I am saying that take my old jewellery melt it and give me a new one, then it means that trader is a registered person and it is as good as buying gold in form of old jewellery,” he said. Under the GST regime rolled out from July 1, tax is levied at 3% on gold, while any form of job work attract 5% levy. When asked about the tax to be levied on downloading of movies and television shows on Netflix, he said the US company was paying service tax , which will now be replaced by GST.
will continue to bring hybrid cars into India despite the higher GST levies on this category of vehicles. The company’s MDtells ET that hybrid cars is the crucial first step in helping India achieve its 2030 goal of switching to electric cars for personal transport. Edited excerpts:Taxation on luxury cars is still quite heavy. That said, GST is a good step towards bringing in more affordable prices. We have seen some car prices going down, some are flat, some have gone up a bit. But for us, GST is a business enabler. The ease of doing business in India will grow. So that is really good. Now we have just transitioned to GST, give it a few months, it will settle down and will be good for business. And if overall business improves, it will be good for the car business as well. We will stick to the target. Of course, we hope to overachieve that and revise that upward, if possible. This year will be really interesting now that we had a good start. Some of our competitors have also announced that they have had a good first half. That is very positive. We will continue with the plan to bring in new cars. The V90 Cross Country is a good example of that, which was launched on Wednesday. We will launch the XC60 later this year and also bring in the small SUV XC40 next year…Of course, the addition of showrooms is very important. We will have 25 showrooms by the end of the year. We are quite confident that we will go to about 2,000 cars this year and further grow for the next few years. Of course, we have to work hard to achieve that. We have a good base right now so I am quite optimistic we will be able to achieve this target. The reason why we talk about 10% segment share and not absolute numbers is we don’t predict the future. There have been so many predictions about the Indian car market and most of them have been wrong so…If I may be conservative, I would guess, the market would be somewhere around 50,000-60,000 cars. And if it is more, we will be more than happy and we will definitely be one source of drawing that. So may be, this year it could go up to 40,000 and then up from that in the next three years. We launched our first plug-in-hybrid last fall. We will continue to launch plug-in-hybrids in all the cars that we bring in. We are committed to that. Then in 2019, we will launch our full electric car globally. So, then of course we are disappointed that there wasn’t more support in GST for plug-in-hybrids. It would have been a motivator for us to bring in more hybrids. But we will stick to our plan and we will definitely bring in more plug-in-hybrids.
MUMBAI | KOLKATA: Several foods and grocery chains kirana shops and electronics retailers are struggling to stock even half their retail shelves because of issues arising out of the transition to the new Goods and Service Tax ( GST ) regime. Deliveries have been impacted because of delays in system upgradation across the supply chain, reduction in primary sales by manufacturers in the last fortnight of June, and the time being taken for new stocks with fresh price tags to hit the market. Normal service is expected to resume in the next two to three weeks. Kishore Biyani , chairman of India’s largest retailer, Future Group, said the ‘fill rate’ at an industry level would be about 55 per cent. “The fill rate has been poor due to renegotiations with FMCG companies on pricing or margins and system upgradation by wholesalers and dealers. We are slightly better off since we ordered in excess last month,” he said, adding he expects stock level to be normal in another 2-3 weeks. Most other retailers said stocks were at 40-55 per cent of the normal level. A senior executive with a leading food and grocery retailer, who did not wish to be named, said even though his chain, anticipating disruption had bought extra inventory in the last ten days of June, it had still experienced loss of business of about 3 per cent in July so far. But retailers describe these shortages as a temporary phenomenon. “It’s a short-term issue and will soon be normal. It takes a while for GST rates to be updated at the trade level,” said Neville Noronha, managing director of Avenue Supermart , the company that runs the DMart chain of stores. Vivek Gambhir, managing director of Godrej Consumer Products Ltd, said the problem was more in rural areas. “The pace of re-stocking is a bit slower in the rural markets as these markets are more dependent on wholesalers and these partners are still adapting to the transition. However, we are hopeful that the overall situation should stabilise by the end of the month,” he said. India moved towards a unified tax structure that replaced multiple state and central levies from July 1. While the rollout has largely been smooth, consumer goods makers, retailers and trade channels have experienced some disruption. Most companies and distributors tried to empty their stocks by June 30 because of uncertainty over transition norms and new prices. This was particularly true of electronic goods retailers who offered huge discounts in June to liquidate their inventory and the manufacturers slowed down or halted their production. The government in early July clarified that companies could sell their unsold stock for three more months by stamping revised prices. But most consumer goods companies felt this was not practical as it would mean pulling back inventory from distributors and retailers. Consumer durable makers said they have started fresh production and billing to distributors and large chains and fresh stock should hit stores by next week. Godrej Appliances business head Kamal Nandi said a lot of changes in invoicing had to be done, including looking into aspects of input tax credit of material purchased in excise regime. “The transition took time. Business should stabilise over the next fortnight,” he said. Durable makers and distributors could only update their billing backend late last week due to some confusion overHSN codes of their products without which they could not complete the transition to GST billing. For instance, earlier the indoor and outdoor unit of a split air-conditioner were invoiced as single unit, but under GST both the units have separate HSN codes and hence billed separately.
In an interaction with ET Now,, said that FIIs flow into the Indian market is largely driven by the performance of economy and asserted that the economic growth has to come back or at least there should be a signs of it so that FIIs can have more conviction on the Indian markets. Edited excerpts:The flows from FIIs have been really robust for this year. If you see from Jan to June, they have pumped in somewhere around $8 billion so far which is a pretty robust number. However, if you break it down a bit most of them or majority of it came in the month of March when we saw a net inflow of $5 billion USD. The flow on a month on month basis though they have slowed down but it is not bad either. A 500 or 600 million USD every month is a good number and we should be happy with that. I see this trend going forward, I do not see any dramatic change to this trend at this point in time. Coming to if you compare this year’s flow with the last five year, the first six months, we had had the third highest net flows for a year, the highest being $14 billion USD that was in 2013 and the second highest was $9 billion USD which was in 2014. Overall it is a good number may be not the best in the last few years but not bad either. What I expected FIIs to continue pumping in money into the Indian markets but the amount of slowdown or the quantum of slowdown was not expected by me as well. I expected a flow of somewhere around 600 or 700 million USD every month on month, but in the month of April and in the month of June the flows have been really slow or low as per my expectation. The reasons for that are not something that very far too, you cannot fathom that -one of the thing is GST has been implemented but there are few short term hiccups which I think FII will be really looking at before putting more money into the markets. The other area of concern which is at present for FIIs is the economic growth, we have not seen the kind of growth that was expected earlier. This rally or the kind of flows that we have seen in the past is largely driven by the expectation that the government will bring in more reforms which is happening but that is not really translating into the growth in the economy. That is one area where I think FIIs are holding on to the investment into the Indian markets at this point in time. Having said that I think the things are getting more clearer and may be in some time we will have a more clear picture as to whether this trend is sort of headed. As of now, I am still positive that we will have a good flow barring few intermediate hiccups, the flow should be good and in the positive terrain at this point in time. The outflows can happen in the Indian markets provided if there are more rate hikes happening in the US Fed. That is one area where we can, there could be a something consider about the Indian, were the flows coming into the Indian markets. The other thing is that we have to look from a perspective that for India for FIIs is an investment destination, it is an investment avenue and they are always comparing India with other emerging markets. So India has to stand out with regards to risk reward profile to have more money from FIIs coming into Indian markets. From that perspective there will always be some risk, but as long as our fundamentals are strong, we are standing on a solid ground at this point in time. But the economic growth has to come back or at least there should be a signs of it so that we can have more conviction or FIIs can have more conviction on the Indian markets if that is not happening then yes there could be some outflow that we can see in the coming months. I have checked the portfolio of India focus offshore funds and ETF and their investment patterns sort of in line with what is being expected. They have invested in financial services and consumer cyclical sectors. These are the sectors which stands to benefit from economic turnaround or fall in interest rate cycle. There are also sectors which are related to pick up in urban consumption demand. Financial services, consumer cyclical sector and within cyclical they are into auto and auto ancillary so these are some of the sectors that they are really expanding their exposure. The other sector that they are looking at is basic materials when they are looking at cement sector as well as metals. Again related to consumer cyclicals and uptick in the demand in the or growth in the economy. The sectors that they are avoiding currently is those sectors where they are seeing a bit of headwind largely IT sector or pharma sector and for that matter communication services or telecom sector. Consumer defensives is another sector that they are holding in their portfolio largely from the defensive perspective to give a defensive tilt to their portfolios which is the fifth largest sector in their holding. Interestingly, the allocation or the investment pattern that they are following is in line with what we are seeing from the Indian fund managers in the mutual fund industry, so they are sort of in tandem with each other not really drifting apart. They have sort of the same opinion on the growth prospects of the Indian economy and that is what we have been observing of late.
