NEW DELHI: India’s central drug regulator has told drug makers and state regulators to ensure that essential medicines are available to patients across the country, following reported incidents of shortages in drugs following the Goods and Services Tax implementation. The country has reportedly witnessed a shortage in essential medicines to treat diabetes and other life-threatening disease after July 1. “…it has been alleged that due to financial loss because of implementation of GST , the drug companies are not releasing their product into the market although stock of hundreds of crores are kept in godowns,” stated Drugs Controller General of India GN Singh in a notice. He added that the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), the country’s apex drug regulator, has allowed companies to re-label old stocks of their medicines with post-GST Maximum Retail Prices (MRP). This has been done to facilitate manufacturers for switching over to the new GST regime smoothly and to ensure that medicines are available to patients “without any regulatory hurdles,” he said.
MUMBAI: The profitability of the organised basmati rice companies is likely to be negatively impacted as the same will be subject to 5% Goods and Services Tax now, said credit rating agency ICRA The GST was implemented in India from July 1. "Earlier basmati rice was subject to value-added-tax (VAT) or was tax free in different states. However under GST, basmati rice has been included in the category of branded cereals registered in the Register of Trade Marks, that attract a levy of 5% GST," the ratings agency said. This is likely to put the branded players in a disadvantageous position compared to the unbranded rice segment as it would further widen the pricing gap and may result in some transition of demand from branded to unbranded basmati rice, it noted. Branded basmati rice companies will see some erosion of profitability as they would look to absorb the GST impact and maintain the pricing parity with the unbranded segment, added ICRA.
NEW DELHI: Five traffic policemen were suspended on Thursday after they were found taking bribes from truck drivers on Tuesday night on the pretext of checking their GST receipts. The policemen, including an assistant sub-inspector acting as a zonal officer, got caught when the traffic police received a complaint that at least five drivers were stopped near toll booths in west Delhi during a night patrol and asked to show the documents. When they couldn't, the cops took money from them as "entry charge". After one of the truck drivers recorded the incident and forwarded it to the WhatsApp number of the traffic police, senior officers took up the matter. The drivers from whom the "fees" were taken were questioned. "We suspended three constables, a head constable and an assistant sub-inspector who were seen in the video footage. Departmental inquiries have been initiated against them," said Narendra Singh Bundela , joint commissioner, traffic. Officers said goods vehicles entering the city were supposed to carry the document receipt as a proof of payment of GST. The bar code on this receipt is scanned by tax officials at the post. Traffic police personnel are present at the posts to keep violations like overloading and speeding under check. Following the complaint, the traffic police has formed a special monitoring unit to keep an eye on their own personnel and will put up its helpline numbers at public places asking drivers to register a complaint on the phone or Facebook. Junior officers, usually out on the field, have been told to be careful. "Teams will conduct surprise checks on personnel deployed on the borders. They will take feedback from truck drivers. Their activities will be monitored by a deputy commissioner of police," said Bundela. The police have also appealed to everybody to report, on its Facebook page and Twitter handle, any incident of overcharging by traffic personnel in the name of GST. "Users can log into our social media handles to post videos and photographs of corrupt practices, which will be taken up," said a senior police officer.
