While we are still in a bull market , the going will be less easy from now on. A better balance is required between large-cap and mid-cap exposures, Taher Badshah tells ET Wealth The headline valuations may not lead you to the right conclusions. Towards the end of last year, when the first set of estimates was coming in for 2017-18, expectations were that this would be a good year, especially on the back of a good monsoon. It was the first time that both urban and rural dynamics were looking positive simultaneously. It looked like both engines were going to fire at the same time. But that expectation was marred by a few incidents like demonetisation and discovery of stress on bank balance sheets. That explains a large part of the detraction of being able to meet the earnings expectation of 2017-18. Meanwhile, a few sectors have done quite well despite the demonetisation. So we are still in the hunt for better earnings in 2017-18. Expectations of 18-20% for 2017-18 are unlikely to be met, but we are looking at closer to 12-15%. That will not be a disaster for the market, simply because it will be better than the single digit earnings growth that we have been experiencing in the last 2-3 years. It will be seen as a decent recovery. It could lead to a situation where we can be hopeful about the next year. Markets will start looking at 2018-19 numbers by the year end. Going by past pattern, the anaemic growth of the past few years should give way to improved earnings trajectory in the coming years. If that is the course that earnings are likely to unfold, then I don’t believe markets are necessarily very expensive. It is not a cheap market, but it is not at a level which needs a significant correction to be rational. We have had a fairly easy part of the bull market pan out in the past few years. It is still a bull market, but likely to be a slightly more difficult one from here on. One may have to be more agile in the portfolio, balance the risk reward a bit more evenly. The ‘one size fits all’ approach will not work. Now, one may need to balance the portfolio with a bit of value-orientation. We have been more cognizant of where the opportunities could lie and balance it out with the risks. We are not chucking away growth or implying that we need to focus purely on value, but have a fair mix of both so that portfolios don’t look very expensive. I would rather that we offer investors a portfolio that is around the market multiples or probably cheaper than that and then claim that we can deliver healthy return on that. We are not compromising on quality. We also need to strike a better balance between our large-cap and mid-cap exposures. We are seeing some exciting stories emerge around large-caps which have been ignored and turned into value plays recently. We are seeing some frontline names perform very well. The ones not working are quite clear. These are facing a lot of challenges and can only be approach from a contrarian perspective. So in case there is a contra focus or mandate in any fund, then select names in IT, pharma or telecom would be interesting opportunities. But among the other sectors, the opportunities are diffused: we like some stocks in consumer discretionary, industrials, private banks, NBFCs, auto and FMCG space. I don’t think it has been fully discounted. I reckon the market will discount GST as it discovers it; it will align itself to the unfolding realities. GST is a completely new thing. It is not as if some part of the market already knows how it will work out. The impact of GST is still anecdotal and not cast in stone. It may be a positive surprise, where it is not as challenging as many believe, or it could turn out to be negative. It is still early days, but you might be able to get some sense of whether it is unfolding well or if there are troubles. By the time the second quarter results are announced, companies will be able to give a better sense of the new tax regime. We keep researching new ideas. If at all we don’t go down the market capitalisation curve, it is because it becomes constraining from the liquidity perspective. We are not averse to looking at decent business models or quality enterprises that are smaller in market cap. Entering junk territory is avoidable, but if it is a small entity, yet has got strong competitive characteristics or catering to a new segment and has got the right platform and ecosystem, then we would be interested. It is not that opportunities in this space are drying up, or that all the quality has been discounted and only the junk is left. There are interesting pockets which are still ignored. Many of these mid-caps do have niche positioning, which are more relevant today. Since we don’t churn portfolios much, we don’t need multiple new ideas to enhance the return profile or generate alpha. We are happy ferreting out just a handful of new ideas to deliver this return. Besides, the primary market has kept throwing up opportunities we have tapped into. While we are seeing more opportunities in the large-cap space, it we have not given up on the mid-caps.
BENGALURU: A fortnight into the goods and services tax ( GST ) regime, sellers and online marketplaces continue to assess the impact of the new tax. While some of them have adopted a wait-and-watch policy, many others whose margins could be hit are holdings talks with brands or vendors. The initial dip in seller numbers by 20-30% across marketplaces indicates the wait-and-watch strategy being adopted by some, on the margins their businesses are likely to make on the ecommerce platforms. Though the feedback from different marketplaces highlights GST as a beneficial tax in the long run for the input tax credit given to sellers, there has been no revision in the margins or commissions paid by sellers to ecommerce platforms. This has seen sellers negotiating with brands and vendors they work with to ensure better margins. "On the Flipkart platform, 95% of our top-sellers are GST compliant. Very few sellers have dropped off the marketplace and it has been business as usual with the number of active sellers in a month remaining constant on the platform," said Nishant Gupta, director of marketplace on Flipkart. "Sellers in the categories where margins will go down are having parallel conversations with us and the brands or vendors they work with for payment. In the medium to long term, prices will reduce when the tax credit system kicks in," he added. Flipkart on last count had little over 1lakh sellers, without disclosing the number of active sellers right now. Paytm Mall , the ecommerce entity of Paytm, recently delisted 85,000 sellers for non-compliance with certain norms laid down by the company, though none were barred from selling for not producing GSTIN registration. "No sellers were delisted due to noncompliance of GSTIN. We have not revised our margins or service fee post GST, though our service charge now carries a GST component," said Amit Sinha, COO of Paytm Mall. The sellers who have dropped out of selling on the marketplaces include long-tail retailers and those running small businesses. "Most of the sellers who have been selling from small setups have opted out of selling on ecommerce platforms due to lack of stocks. As we are the importers and wholesalers for most of our products on online platforms, we are able to absorb the new tax rates from our margins," said Shaival Gandhi, who owns Pace Sports , an entity selling sports goods, kids toys and lifestyle products across major marketplaces. He added that the increase in tax from 5% VAT to 12% under GST for a category like toys will lead to price rise in the long run, especially where retailers are selling at a margin on the marketplace. "We have been negotiating with the brands we procure and sell from as our margin on sale for the smartphone category has come down to 1% instead of 2% we used to make earlier. GST on tablets is also high at 18%. From a marketplace's view, we will get the input tax credit on GST and hence they will not change the margins," said Sumanth Lingala, owner of Green Mobiles which retails consumer electronics online. He adds that there is also the catch of showing that input tax credit has been used to offer consumer benefits, a requirement under GST. Hence the products cannot be priced higher than before. A spokesperson for Amazon India said the number of sellers has not changed since GST implementation. "We haven't made any changes to our commission structure. Our system identifies the destination pin code of the customer based on the delivery address and applies the relevant tax," said an Amazon India spokesperson. Some sellers who are not a part of the marketplaces are also leaving to opt for the composition scheme, which allows businesses with turnover less than Rs 75 lakh to file returns on a quarterly basis, but must only deal with intrastate supplies and cannot avail of input tax credit. Several sellers have also stopped selling in categories which have seen a sharp rise in tax, such as watches and sports goods which now invite 28% tax. "One of the only concerns among sellers is regarding how returns need to be filed, whether it should have state-wise summaries or just turnover. We are discussing this with the ecommerce committee and we hope it is finalised before September," an AIOVA spokesperson said.
ET Intelligence Group: Hindustan Unilever’s ( HUL ) first quarter results, to be announced on Tuesday, will be one of the most awaited by those who are closely tracking the fast-moving consumer goods industry to gauge the disruptive impact of the new tax regime on the industry bellwether. One of the earliest companies to post its first quarter results, HUL’s performance will reveal how much of its primary sales were impacted due to GST. The destocking by the trade in the weeks before the GST rollout is likely to hamper the growth numbers. While the company’s revenue may grow 1-2 per cent, thanks to price increases, volumes may either remain flat or see a low single-digit decline. Companies such as HUL that have a strong network with various trade channels are likely to face lower impact of destocking than its smaller peers. Price increases taken during the quarter and a lower ad spend budget could enable the company to maintain its operating profitability at 19-20 per cent. The Street expects HUL to outperform. Evidently, the stock has gained 13 per cent since reporting its fourth quarter results in May earlier. Investors would be keen to know the management’s commentary on the impact of GST on the current quarter sales, pace of restocking at the trade level, its focus on natural products, outlook on demand, especially in rural areas, and expected trend on advertising spend. The HUL stock is trading at a forward FY18 earnings multiple of 47 with limited scope for a major upside. However, high valuations have historically not deterred the Street from lapping up the best performing stocks. Data from Bloomberg shows that 52 per cent of the analysts tracking the HUL stock are bullish on it ahead of the first quarter results.
NEW DELHI: The Communications Ministry will "analyse" the impact of Goods and Services Tax on telecom subscribers, and approach the Finance Ministry in case consumers or players face "genuine problems", Telecom Minister Manoj Sinha said today. The GST rate for telecom services is 18 per cent. This is higher than 15 per cent that consumers paid on their phone bills in taxes and cess, before July 1. However, under GST, the telecom operators will also get the benefit of input tax credit, bringing the overall effective rates lower for consumers. "If there are genuine problems then definitely I will consult the finance minister....We will analyse what people were paying earlier, the impact of GST, and whether input credit is being passed on to consumers," Sinha told reporters here. As of now there are no plans to approach the GST Council or finance ministry in this regard, he added. The minister noted that the impact of input credit will bring taxation levels lower, and hence the effective rate will be closer to 16 per cent. He conceded that there may be an operational difficulty for players to claim input tax credit since they operate across geographies. "This is an operational issue...let us see how to resolve this," he said. Sinha said his ministry is keeping a close watch on the sector with regard to GST implications and will take a call "very soon" based on billing patterns. "But players also cannot go against the spirit of GST. GST Council and Government will see to it," he said. Sinha said the proposal on the second phase of Bharat Net project - which seeks to provide broadband connectivity to 1.5 lakh gram panchayats - has been sent for cabinet approval, and hoped that it will be taken up shortly. An official familiar with the proposal said overall outlay for the project stands at Rs 42,068 crore. This includes Rs 11,148 crore for first phase, and Rs 18,792 crore for second phase. Additionally, there are expenses for last mile connectivity and operations and maintenance cost, the official added. The ministry expects to usher in the New Telecom Policy before March 2018, Sinha said. "A lot of things have changed in the last five years...New technologies like 5G, Internet of Things and Artificial Intelligence have come up...So we will have a wide consultation on those aspects (in the new policy)," the minister added.
One of the unique features of the Goods and Services Tax ( GST ) is that financial reporting has to be done online and there is no offline channel available for anyone. This means an entire segment of companies, which till now may have never turned on a computer, suddenly find themselves having to navigate complex technology challenges. While there are plenty of tech challenges, companies are worried about the security of their crucial financial date being transmitted over the Internet, especially after the recent global WanaCry ransomware. The key to getting your security right is to understand how the GST reporting system works. You can directly upload your financial data on the GSTN , in which case your online security is as good as you have set it up to be. You then have GST Suvidha Provider ( GSP ) and Application Service Providers ( ASPs ) that help you in financial compliance in case you cannot do it on your own. "Regards safety of data, what we need to understand is that GSP is a highly regulated body with very strong controls that are mandated by the GSTN. It is basically a data pipe, where your data flows in from the ASP, which has access to your data. The GSP by law cannot look at what the data is, it can only look at the meta data, which means it can only identify that this data belongs to a certain Mr. X, this is GSTR-1, it has this many kilo bytes of data, it has your digital signature, and it will transmit such information to the GSTN. The GSP cannot store your data at its end, the data is only stored at GSTN," says Manish Chowdhary, CEO, Tally Education One of the key reasons why GSP's have been created is because only limited number of parties have access to the connectivity at the GSTN system. "Otherwise you will have millions of people trying to connect to GSTN system, which is basically housing the economic data of the country. So it is a headless system to which only limited number of secured pipes is connected. The secured pipes which, are the GSP's will control any malware flawing into the system, will remove irrelevant data and will be the first point of ensuring that only clean data transits," says Chowdhary. It is then; we need to take a look at the second layer of assistance, which are the ASPs. Unlike the GSP, your financial data is available to ASPs and this is where you need to have a close look at security. "Having said that, your ASP will obviously have access to your data, but the client is the end user so the data continues to belong to him and whatever security measures you have on your system is also what keeps your data secured," says Chowdhary. When it comes to security, both you and your ASP needs to have a robust security system. "There are two kinds of service providers, service providers like GSPs, wherein the data is merely given the go ahead to complete the reporting. The second kind of reporting or the second kind of service providers called ASPs, who in some ways take your data. Obviously the security of someone else's data for credible service providers is of paramount importance. For these GSPs and ASPs, it is the credibility at a stake," says Uday Pimprikar, Partner at Ernst & Young, India. Pimprikar adds that GSPs and ASPs which are credible will obviously build in adequate security measures. "To my mind a company needs to go ahead and when you are evaluating the person to kind of work with or tool to use, it is clear you should look at security ad one of the parameters to make that decision of who or what has access to you financial data," says Pimprikar.
