NEW DELHI: The telecom department will look into the impact of the goods and services tax rate of 18% on mobile phone charges and may approach the finance ministry if consumers or companies face problems.However, telecom minister Manoj Sinha said operators should pass on the benefit of input tax credit of 2% under GST , which will bring the effective tax rate for consumers to 16%.The tax rate for telecom services, set by the GST Council from July 1, is higher than the 15% that consumers paid as taxes and cess in the previous regime. “If there are genuine problems, then definitely I will consult the finance minister... We will analyse what people were paying earlier, the impact of GST, and whether input credit is being passed on to consumers,” Sinha said Monday.The minister said the department had no immediate plan of approaching the GST Council or the finance ministry in this regard.Telcos have said the higher tax rate will inflate costs for consumers. The government had asked operators to cut prices of services by rejigging costs to factor in the benefits of increased tax credits under GST. According to the finance ministry, the additional input tax credits would be “as much as 2% of the turnover of the telecoms industry.”However, telcos disagreed with the contention. Sinha conceded there may be difficulties for companies to claim input tax credit since they operate across states. “This is an operational issue... let us see how to resolve this,” he said. Sinha said his ministry is keeping a close watch on the sector with regard to GST implications and will take a call “very soon.”Separately, the ministry proposed an outlay of Rs 42,068 crore for its key project of providing broadband connectivity to 1.5 lakh gram panchayats – Bharat Net, which it is speeding up. A department official said the proposal, which includes Rs 11,148 crore for the first phase, Rs 18,792 crore for the second phase and expenses for last-mile connectivity, operations and maintenance, has been sent to the Cabinet for approval.
NEW DELHI: The steel ministry has expressed concerns that cost of steel manufacturing will increase as electricity , being one of the major inputs, has been kept out of the Goods and Service Tax.The concerns were expressed at a recent meeting of the ministry with the Prime Minister's Office, a government official said."Electricity being a major input for steel industry will increase the cost of manufacturing if it remains out of the GST ," the official said.The concerns were also expressed by the steel ministry during the meeting that the Clean Energy Cess of Rs 400 per tonne which was being charged pre GST remains effectively non-cenvatable in the new regime.Natural gas, one of the inputs used in manufacturing sponge iron/Hot Briquetted Iron , an intermediate product used in steel making, has been kept out of GST purview. Under the previous regime, a partial was available, the official said."However, in the new regime, the tax paid on the natural gas is a cost and no input tax credit is available on the same," the official added.The steel ministry is also of view that royalty is charged on iron ore at 15 per cent of the base price and is yet not cenvatable.Besides, Forest Development Fee (FDF) and similar charges like contribution in District Mineral Foundation and National Mineral Exploration Trust, which are in the nature of tax, need to be subsumed in GST, the official said.The steel industry had earlier in the month said that with GST rollout the unorganised players in the sector will have to move to organised form of doing business.GST --- India's biggest tax reform since the Independence --- was rolled out this month, unifying more than a dozen central and state levies.
India's new tax regime is causing widespread headaches for small merchants and the e-commerce companies they work with.The Goods and Services Tax , which went into effect July 1, has been touted as the biggest tax reform since the country’s independence seven decades ago, aimed at replacing hundreds of regional and federal levies with a standardized national tax. But retailers are discovering the new system is anything but simple.They're battling a dizzying array of documentation requirements and product classifications, which affect the percentage of tax charged, that threaten to choke businesses with bureaucracy. Thousands of small merchants have been dropped from e-commerce sites because they can't meet the new requirements.Seller Archit Agarwal is still struggling to get the new rules straight after months of preparation. The owner of A2A Trading sells imported wireless headphones on Amazon .com's local site, but he's scrambling to figure out how his existing warehouse stock should be taxed, how customer returns should be handled and how detailed record-keeping should be. In August, he'll start filing three sets of monthly tax returns."The new system is overwhelming," said the 32-year-old just days after the GST was put in place. The harried Agarwal was heading into a low-rise building in Bangalore to one of Amazon's 16 pop-up GST Cafés . A sign outside advertises, "Get GST compliant and sell online chinta-free," and dozens of sellers have come to offload their 'chinta,' or worries, before the online giant’s panel of taxation experts.The rate of GST varies depends on the product and service, ranging from zero to 28 percent, as well as numerous exemptions. For example, fresh milk doesn't incur GST, cream attracts a 5 percent rate while butter and cheese are charged at 12 percent.While merchants didn’t always comply with their tax obligations under the old regime, the consequences of not filing proper returns now are dire. Penalties range from fines of 10,000 rupees ($155) to five years in jail. Those with large amounts of tax due will not be eligible for bail.In the past weeks, e-commerce companies big and small have bounced thousands of non-compliant sellers off their websites. Some small businesses and restaurants have voluntarily dropped out because they can’t meet the new requirements. Flipkart Online Services Pvt. , the country's largest online retailer, said "close to 95 percent" of its 100,000 merchants are compliant, but the rest were removed before the GST kicked in. Rival Amazon said it would retain nearly all of its 200,000 merchants."Small e-commerce businesses are getting knocked out by GST," said Ravjeet Singh of the Delhi-based MS Trading Co. , which sells men's t-shirts on both sites. "The changeover is complicated and the penalties for not paying timely taxes are so harsh that people are scared."Mumbai-based fashion e-commerce startup Fynd said its sellers complained that the GST website had stopped taking registrations and was down, a sign of upcoming trouble. The site has dropped almost 10 percent of its 330 sellers."Merchants are seeking clarity on a number of vexing questions," said Harsh Shah, the company's co-founder. "They are also are not quite sure what happens in various scenarios like discounts or in bundled offers."Nevertheless, the e-commerce industry largely views the overhaul as paving the way for long-term growth. Businesses are no longer required to go to multiple agencies in different regions or pass through entry points in each region, where miles-long truck lines were common.Companies like Flipkart and Amazon, which source products and locate warehouses at multiple locations for tax purposes, will be able to reduce costs as transportation expenses fall and deliveries arrive faster. "Online retail will be a lot more streamlined," said Vivek Somareddy, an Amazon executive who has worked with merchants to prepare for the new tax.The pain will last through the next few quarters, said Sampad Swain, co-founder and chief executive officer of Instamojo, an e-commerce platform that helps small businesses sell online. Only about half the 250,000 businesses that sell mangoes, umbrellas and cupcakes on his site are registered with the new tax website. But Swain expects the number of businesses on his platform to swell to one million in the next 18 months."Small businesses will find the going a lot easier under the new tax regime and this will become clearer as months go by," he said.
On July 1, at the stroke of the midnight hour, India woke to see its new tryst with destiny - Goods & Services Tax ('GST'). Pebbled as not being a mere tax reform, GST is expected to stimulate socio-economic growth by softening prices and plunging the parallel economy.Any new law typically entails various changes to gear up for - with efforts being commanded both from a law makers as well as industry perspective. In the backdrop of indirect taxes being a key factor for supply chain modelling of Indian businesses, GST being a complete overhaul of the existing taxation structure, is expected to affect the transaction system as a whole. The new law while would definitely unleash a huge quantum of positive impulses, but would also have various challenges to conquer - especially in the short term on account of various obscurities.While the GST law and related Rules/ Notifications have addressed various concerns and demands from time to time lobbied for by the industry, opacities still continue; some essentially being on account of the intrinsic federal structure and others on the gargantuan intensity of the reform.One of such ambiguities being taxability of supplies to Jammu & Kashmir. The GST law in its current form, applies to the whole of India except the state of Jammu & Kashmir. A reading of the said provision seems to suggest that GST would apply on the sales/ stock transfers made to businesses/ branch offices respectively in J&K.However, for further supplies by the businesses/ branch offices to consumers/ other businesses in J&K, local J&K taxes would apply vis-à-vis GST, entailing GST charged on the inputs for such supplies becoming a cost in the supply chain.Another worrisome aspect under GST is exports for automobile sector/ other sectors on which compensation cess is leviable under the rebate route. Aligned to the government's objective of promoting exports and earning of related foreign exchange, the GST regime inherits the current zero rating for exports i.e., non-payment of GST on exports.Alternatively, the Government also prescribes a mechanism for payment of IGST with claiming of corresponding refund of the same - the shipping bill filed being the deemed application for such refund. Basis the recently released format of the shipping bill, while the exporters could include information of the IGST paid on exports, there appears to be no field in the format for inclusion of the compensation cess paid.On similar lines, the outward supply return to be filed under GST i.e., GSTR-1 as well does not include a separate field to report details of cess paid on exports. This intentional/ unintentional miss has elicited apprehensions especially for automobile exporters as to whether compensation cess is required to be charged on exports.Separately, another aspect of worry for the industry as a whole has been the continuation of concessional rate benefits on items which have kept outside the GST realm as of now; existing taxes inter-alia including CST continuing to be levied on such supplies.These products essentially include petrol, diesel, ATF and natural gas which are required by most manufacturing houses. To recap, currently a manufacturer could procure such products at a concessional rate of CST against Form C.However, given the amendments in the CST Act for harmonizing it to the GST regime, issuance of Form C's and related concessional rate benefits for such procurements seems unlikely. While this could have a miniscule impact for some industries, discontinuation of such concessional rate benefits could entail sharp increase in costs for some sectors like fertilizers and many more where these products form a significant proportion of the total costs.Amidst various other technical worries and related impact on cost, the industry as a whole, has been sceptical on the way-bill related requirements for movement of goods. The said worry essentially being on account of the postponement of the e-way related requirements under GST with no related clarity on continuation of existing procedures.While some states have issued Notifications/ Circulars clarifying the continuation/ discontinuation of the existing way-bill related requirements, clarity is awaited from most states; the same entailing trepidations on sale/ purchase of goods by businesses.Another worry from a working capital perspective has been the levy of IGST at the time of import of goods leased from foreign countries. Herein, it is pertinent to note that leasing of goods from overseas countries could entail dual levy of GST, both at the time of import of goods as well as "import of service" i.e., payment of lease charges, given that "leasing" has been clarified to be a service under GST. While this aspect could impact various industries, it circularizes more of a concern for the airline sector, where typically the aircrafts are leased from foreign countries.With the Government's positive outlook to addressing industry worries and apprehensions coupled with clarities being issued from time to time in the recent weeks for most aspects, we expect most of the above issues, including various other issues not highlighted above, to be discussed with the industry and appropriate clarities being issued for the same.Abhishek Jain is Tax Partner, EY India. Sonam Bhandari, senior tax professional, EY also contributed to the article.Views expressed are their personal.
NEW DELHI: The Delhi High Court today sought response of the Centre on a plea against imposition of 12 per cent GST on sanitary napkins A bench of Acting Chief Justice Gita Mittal and Justice C Hari Shankar also issued notices to the Finance Ministry and the Goods and Services Tax Council directing them to file their counter in the matter.The bench was of the view that the issue needs to be examined, therefore, the authorities need to justify their stand in their counter affidavit.The court has fixed the matter for hearing on November 15.The petition filed by Zarmina Israr Khan, who is a PhD scholar in African studies at the Jawaharlal Nehru University, challenged the levying of 12 per cent GST on sanitary napkins, terming it illegal and unconstitutional.She claimed that the petition has been filed for the benefit of women in general, particularly those belonging to the lower economic strata of society.The plea filed through advocate Amit George sought quashing of the imposition of 12 per cent GST on sanitary napkins, and declaring them to be liable to a 'nil' rate or a reduced rate.The plea alleged that 12 per cent slab on sanitary napkins, a shade lower than 13.7 per cent in the previous indirect tax regime, is ex-facie unconstitutional, illegal and arbitrary which has witnessed strong dissent and calls for corrective action from individuals and organizations across the country.The petition said that the government had exempted goods like kajal, kumkum, bindis, sindur, alta, plastic and glass bangles, hearing aids, passenger baggage, puja samagri of all kinds, and all types of contraceptives, including condoms, from the purview of taxation but not extended the exemption to sanitary napkins which are essential for the health of women."The government has grouped sanitary napkins with toys, leather goods, roasted coffee, mobile phones and processed foods amongst others for the imposition of a GST rate of 12 per cent under the present tax regime. Such an action/omission is palpably arbitrary and unreasonable," it said.
PATIALA: The apex Sikh religious body SGPC today expressed displeasure with the Centre for not exempting 'Langar' from the Goods and Services Tax ( GST ). Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee chief Kirpal Singh Badungar compared the imposition of GST on Langar - the Sikh community kitchen - with the 'Jaziya' tax imposed by the Mughals on non-Muslims.Talking to reporters here, he said the SGPC had written a letter to Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley , seeking exemption from GST."But rather than taking a positive action on the request, the Union finance minister has not even reverted to our letter," rued Badungar.The SGPC chief said 'Langar Sewa' was started by the Sikh gurus and the Union government had shown no concerns to address the sentiments of the Sikh community.He said the community had made great sacrifices for the freedom of the country and it was unbecoming on the part of the Union government not to exempt purchases made by SGPC to offer free food to devotees.
NEW DELHI: Shares of tobacco manufacturers came under severe pressure on Tuesday after the GST Council on Monday increased cess on cigarettes.FMCG major ITC plunged as much as 14 per cent to a low of Rs 276.90 in trade so far. The scrip was trading 12 per cent down at Rs 287.70 around 11 am (IST). It eventually closed at Rs 284.60, down 12.63 per cent. This was the biggest single day drop for the stock in 25 years. VST Industries plunged as much as 7.83 per cent to end at Rs 3,281.80, while Godfrey Phillips declined 5.69 per cent to Rs 1,157.60 on BSE.The GST Council on Monday raised the cess on cigarettes to take away an estimated Rs 5,000 crore annual “windfall” manufacturers could have reaped from lower GST rates, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said.Jaitley said it had previously fixed a peak GST rate of 28 per cent on cigarettes.On top of it, a cess was levied to create a corpus for compensating states for any loss of revenue from implementing the GST, which subsumed over a dozen central and state levies.The cess was made up of 5 per cent ad valorem rate and a fixed per thousand stick rate based on length of cigarettes.The peak GST rate of 28 per cent as also the 5 per cent ad valorem cess will continue but the fixed cess has been hiked in the range of Rs 485 and 792 per thousand sticks, he said.Brokerage firm HSBC maintained hold rating on ITC with a target price of Rs 320. “The incremental cess on cigarettes will results in 1 per cent to 7 per cent decline in net realisation per stick under new rates and ITC may now require about incremental 2 per cent weighted average price hike to negate the impact of the increase in taxation,” the brokerage said.The brokerage added that the impact of higher cess is likely to have the most impact on 84mm length cigarettes where the ad valorem component of compensation cess increased from 5 per cent to 36 per cent.“ITC at our target price requires long-term earnings growth of 11-12 per cent, which we think is plausible, but this leaves little alpha to capture,” said the brokerage.
In an interview with ET Now,, shares his views on the company's growth plans. Edited excerpts:There has been no change in pricing as such, but initial hiccups are there with GST, the demand has not been so great because everybody is still to decide on the software, how to bill to their customers. But going forward we see a huge gain from GST because we intend to get a good share of the unorganised market.With our entry level brand which is Jon the differential would not be very high. As on date also the differential is not that high. So if that reduces further I do not think it will be an incentive for any consumer to buy unbranded if they get a branded product at a slightly higher price.I think it would be around 70:30. 70% would be unorganised.The segment would be women lingerie or a sportswear brand, in these two segments we are not really strong and we see a growth in these segments going forward. We are looking at these two sectors mainly.No. We keep on talking to a lot of companies and we have not zeroed in on any company as such. Till now we have not.You see any company can be apt as long as it fits our targets and budget also.We have not zeroed in on any company as such. It can be an international company...See it can be any international company also. What we look at is the brand and what it has to offer. It can be a technical tie up if it is not a strong brand and if it is a strong brand internationally or locally, we might have a different sort of tie up. The budget is not a constraint, the constraint would be what the brand has to offer and what we get from it.
NEW DELHI: A nine-day business conference to be held in September in Kochi, Kerala, has just moved to Sri Lanka , with the organisers coming around to the view that footing the goods & services tax ( GST ) rate of 28% for the event is way too much than paying taxes in hotels in the neighbouring country.“With most hotels being close to the national highways in Kerala, business was already hit with the Supreme Court ruling on liqour ban. GST has made the MICE business a national issue and has made matters worse. Why have they complicated matters with multiple slabs? The concept of GST globally is one tax, one slab,” said Jose Pradeep, treasurer of the Kerala Travel Mart Society.Hotels across the country have started getting cancellation requests, and hosting MICE (meetings, incentives, conferences and exhibitions) events have become an expensive affair since the GST rates kicked in on July 1.Hoteliers said that with the 28% tax slab, high-end Indian hotels have become steeper than countries such as Thailand and Sri Lanka, leading to bookings being renegotiated or even moving to other countries. Bookings for MICE events happen at least 6-8 months and at times even one or two years in advance in a bid to get lower rates.Elsewhere, at Le meridian in Lutyens' Delhi, calls and concerns are pouring in for MICE events. “People are expressing concerns and expecting us to renegotiate our base rates. We are evaluating these events on a case-to-case basis as some of these events are planned in advance and cannot keralbe moved at the last minute.” said Tarun Thakral, chief operating officer at Le Meridian Delhi.Garish Oberoi, VP, Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India, said hotels, especially in places like Delhi, Kerala and Agra which boast of large convention centres for corporate events are losing business to other countries.Oberoi said the association has tried reasoning with the government that the tax slabs cannot be on the published tariffs, but on the invoice value which could change with season.“MICE events will definitely get hit as the 28% tax slab will turn out to be steeper. Even if the hotels hosting MICE events have tariffs of less than Rs 7500, an extra bed in a room with much lower room tariffs will also attract a tax of 28% on the addition, according to the GST rules. Hotels with tariffs of Rs 7500 and above are the ones which usually have large convention centres,” said Vishal Kamat, director of the Kamat Group, which runs the Orchid hotel in Mumbai.Dilip Datwani, president of the Hotel and Restaurant Association of Western India, said MICE events are getting cancelled not just in markets like Mumbai but across the country.Subramanya Sharma, chief marketing officer and head of products at travel portal Cleartrip, said hotels priced above Rs 7500 are seeing a much slower growth in bookings on the portal than the hotels priced below. “The length of the stay in these hotels has also decreased slightly,” he said.
