NEW DELHI: Revenue authorities will go slow in undertaking enforcement actions under GST for the first six months as they want industry to settle down into the new indirect tax regime. CBEC ) Chairperson Vanaja Sarna said there will be genuine errors due to lack of understanding in the initial days."CBEC has enforcement authorities and I have specifically said that the first three to six months are a go-slow.... I don't want small cases to be made," Sarna said at a CII event here.She said people will take time to fall in line and CBEC has to encourage them to come into the fold."With the kind of input tax credit ITC ) being offered, assessee base will widen. I'm definitely not looking at any hard line attitude to start with, we would want it to settle down," Sarna said.She said CBEC has been hand-holding traders and businesses to make Goods and Services Tax (GST) a success."We would like it to be a complete success and we have enough legacy work in enforcement to be busy and we are not plunging into this now," she said.Under GST, rolled out on July 1, businesses have to ensure various compliances as the new rules have to be followed strictly.Sarna said the twitter account set up to answer queries by industry has been getting 13,000 queries per day.Admitting that GST implementation has not been glitch free, Sarna said the CBEC will come out with second round of FAQs to clarify the issues related to GST.CBEC had constituted 18 sectoral groups to look into various issues faced by different sections of industry.Of these, three groups have submitted their report. The law committee is examining the reports, Sarna said."We are not looking to dismantling these working groups and they would assist the industry in the problems they face in the GST regime," she said.
NEW DELHI: Sales of fast-fashion and lifestyle brands in India dropped by about a fifth in July despite eye-popping discounts, with industry experts attributing the decline to shoppers having advanced their purchasing to June before the national rollout of the single producer levy. The Goods and Services Tax ( GST ), which kicked in from July 1, involves a tax incidence of 12% instead of 5%.“The reason for the drop could be that the industry had advanced the sales (to June),” said Jacob John, deputy chief executive of Lifestyle department stores chain.At his stores, July sales were only marginally lower at about 5%. “This year, Eid was in June. So, some amount of Eid business also shifted to June and it was a good June for us,” John added.Even though taxes on branded garments costing more than Rs 1,000 were raised from 5% to 12% after the GST was introduced, retailers from Levi’s to Lifestyle say they still haven’t increased the prices and are currently absorbing the differences in taxes themselves rather than passing them on to the consumers.“Even if the prices increase due to GST, they can happen only after two-three months. I cannot do it immediately,” said John of Lifestyle. “So far, there is no change in our pricing.”On Tuesday, Levi’s, Benetton Aldo , Marks & Spencer, Pantaloons , and Lifestyle offered flat 50% discounts at the Mall of India in Noida. A host of other brands, including US Polo, Tommy Hilfiger, Aeropostale, and Calvin Klein offered up to 50% discounts. An executive at a Zara store in the National Capital Region said the sale could continue until August depending on how long the stock lasts.India is witnessing one of the most-extended discounting seasons from fashion and lifestyle brands since November – first due to the demonetisation and now because of the GST. The introduction of the single levy has prompted retailers to advance their annual discounting season by a month to June.“I haven’t seen so many discount sales since the 2008-09 Lehman Brothers crisis when retailers were left with excess inventory and the market was bad, sentiments were down and malls got deferred,” said the chief executive of a global lifestyle brand, requesting anonymity.Retailers say that they had overcome the impact of demonetisation and were looking forward to better business this financial year. However, with e-commerce companies Amazon Flipkart and Myntra continuing to offer discounts, brick-andmortar stores had to stay competitive and offer major cuts.“Challenges were there — be they demonetisation or the GST — and if we don’t respond adequately, we’ll be in trouble,” said Vishnu Prasad, chief executive of the Future Group-owned Central malls. Central advanced its sales season by a week to June 19. Before that, it had promotional events over various weekends.Advancing the ‘End of the Season’ sale has disturbed the annual business cycle, which involves new ranges hitting the shelves in August.“This time, new stocks are not coming because of the GST,” said the CEO of the global brand quoted above. That means the discount season will continue in July and may even spill over into August.Vishnu Prasad said Central has a “tentative plan” of ending the sale by July 31. “It depends on how the rest of the days in July shape up,” Prasad said.
NEW DELHI: GST rates will not be revised unless there is an anomaly or the rates are unjustified, CBEC Chairperson Vanaja Sarna said today.Her comments came in the wake of textile traders' demand of lowering five per cent GST on textiles."It is an issue that has snowballed but it is not something which cannot be settled... The issue is that textile sector is taxed for the first time. So anybody who comes into the net would feel the pinch," Sarna said at a CII event here.Yesterday, the traders in Surat called off their two- week-long strike against five per cent GST following the Centre's assurance to look into their demand of rollback.She further said: "Unless there is something not fully justified. ..unless there is an anomaly, I don't think there is a reason to look at any rates at the moment."The Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) has received representations from textile traders and is looking into their demands, Sarna said.She said industry will have issues relating to GST rates, laws and rules and there is still time for industry to present its wish list as July one was not the end date.But, it would not be possible to meet the demand for GST rate reduction unless there is an anomaly, or there is a need for correction, or something has been left out."July one doesn't close everything and the kind of fitment of commodities that has taken place is kind of doing five budgets in one," she said.GST was rolled out on July one and has four tier tax slab of 5, 12, 18 and 28 per cent.Over 1,200 goods and 500 services have been fit into these tax slabs.
NEW DELHI: Tax departments across the country are keeping a close watch on prices following the July 1 rollout of the goods and services tax ( GST ).Makers of consumer goods and handsets, as well as some restaurant chains, have all got calls from local tax authorities seeking details of invoices before and after GST as part of the exercise.“In order to study prices under the GST, you are requested to send selling price of your top commodity... in the relevant format,” read a notice sent to a company by local tax authorities in Tamil Nadu.Similar messages have been sent to companies in states such as Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Puducherry. Some have even got phone calls seeking price information, said a person aware of the development.The government is keen to prevent any spike in inflation due to GST as happened in some countries that implemented the levy. India has opted for a two-pronged solution to make sure this doesn’t happen — a multi-rate GST structure and a proposed anti-profiteering agency.The GST Council has tried to ensure that items are placed in slabs that are closest to the rate at which they were taxed earlier. The levy has four tiers — 5 per cent, 12 per cent, 18 per cent and 28 per cent.Malaysia and Australia had put in place a mechanism to ensure prices didn’t shoot up after the indirect tax was implemented in those countries.When industry had expressed concern that the anti-profiteering initiative may evolve into a modern-day inspector raj, it was assured that this wouldn’t be the case.The government has so far maintained that the anti-profiteering provision is a deterrent and expects industry to pass on any cost reductions due to GST to consumers and not raise prices. Implicit in this was the assurance that investigations would be triggered by consumer complaints.The latest move by tax authorities comes as the anti-profiteering framework is yet to be operationalised. Experts said it would be an added complication as companies seek to comply with new tax regime.“These random enquiries by the authorities are not in line with the rules notified and lead to avoidable paperwork for companies at the time when they are trying to settle in the new tax regime,” said Pratik Jain, leader, indirect taxes , PwC.“GST council should take a note of this and issue appropriate guidelines.”The government is monitoring prices and the supply situation. More than 200 officials of the rank of joint secretary and additional secretary have been assigned four-five districts each to closely watch implementation.Rules empower a five-member National Anti-Profiteering Authority to order price cuts to the extent of lower taxes, impose penalties or even cancel registrations under the GST Act, effectively stopping the entity from doing business.Besides that, a standing committee of nine members, consisting of state, central and GST Council officials, will examine complaints that will be passed on to the director general, safeguards, for investigation.The proposed anti-profiteering authority will take the final call on whether a company has engaged in profiteering.The intent to protect the interest of consumers is laudable. But it should not become a potential source of harassment for the industry that is switching over to the new tax regime, and needs easier compliance. The best way to protect consumer interests’ is to trust competition in the market place to set fair prices. Enabling easy entry and exit for all industries will foster competition. GST cuts out the cascade of many taxes that products had to bear, and would bring down prices anyway
BENGALURU: Nandan Nilekani , former UIDAI chairman, believes that the conversation around the goods and services tax ( GST ) has mostly been around challenges, but it can also be viewed as a great source for data interpretation. Nilekani was speaking at an event along with DJ Patil, the former chief data scientist for the Obama government."The big thing that people have not seen from a data perspective is - the recent launch of the goods and services tax. A lot of focus has been on the challenges, but actually it is a fantastic data issue. Because for the first time eight million businesses will be digitally recorded in a central tax database. It has never happened before," said Nilekani.Nilekani believes the scale of operations wherein everything from a "steel rod to a haircut" will be recorded and thus generate never-before-seen data."The average is about 120 invoices per business. You are talking about a billion records every month... it will flow digitally into the GST system. That is a massive source of figuring out how the economy is doing, where is it going, where it is not going and supply chain efficiencies," said Nilekani.The former Infosys chief, who led the Aadhaar drive, also said that India has been able to leapfrog in digital initiatives as there is no 'legacy' and these initiatives are being carried out in such a manner so as to put the “user at the seat of the table.""The advantage we have in India iswe have no legacy. (Now) we have 500 million Aadhaar-linked bank accounts and we run the world's biggest cash transfer program. This is deep stuff. Now with Digital Locker Authority , we have a way to organise data by putting people at the centre of it. It is lucky that we do not have anything. We can leapfrog," he said.
NEW DELHI: Local beverage players, numbering in hundreds, have firmed up plans to add fruit juice to carbonated beverages as part of their attempts to lower the Goods and Services Tax (GST) burden. While fizzy drinks such as Coke , Pepsi cola and Sprite attract 40% tax under GST , beverages based on fruit pulp or fruit juice fall in the 12% tax slab.In a bid to increase sourcing from Indian farmers, in 2014, PM Narendra Modi had urged multinational beverage companies such as Coca-Cola and PepsiCo to add 5% natural fruit juice in their products. It resulted in Coke launching Fanta with 5% Indian-origin orange juice in select markets. The global giants had pitched for lower taxes on these products, arguing these were not aerated drinks that face higher levies as the government believes that they are not healthy."Business has taken a big hit after GST," said MD of Fresca Juices, Akhil Gupta, who along with others in the industry, is leading a consortium of B-brands that operate in small geographies across the country." Adding fruit juice or pulp to certain variants of fizzy drinks will help local players sustain their low prices."Over the years, small regional players, including City Cola, Jayanti Beverages, Campa Cola and Xalta , have managed to wrest away share from the biggies in India's Rs 14,000-crore soft drinks market by undercutting prices by at least 30-40%. While it is difficult to add fruit juice to colas, said Gupta, fruit pulp or juice can be put into fizzy drinks with orange, lemon or other local flavours."It could prove to be a good move, especially since colas have been hammered across the world over health concerns," said Rajat Wahi, partner, management consulting, at Deloitte India. "So, anything that could add a health angle to fizzy drinks will give a leg up to the industry."Carbonated beverages, such as colas, lead the beverage market with around 70% share. However, industry experts said consumption patterns have shifted over the last three years with a growing preference for health-based drinks.
Higher commodity prices coupled with destocking in the runup to the GST rollout during the second half of June are likely to dent bottomline figures of Bajaj Auto in Q1FY18. The company is scheduled to announce its results on Thursday.Brokerage firm Motilal Oswal sees 9.7 per cent year-on-year fall in net profit at Rs 883.20 crore for the quarter under review. It had reported net profit of Rs 978.40 crore in the same quarter last year. Net sales of the company may fall 8.90 per cent YoY to Rs 5233.50 crore during the quarter under review.In the upcoming quarterly results, one should look for an update on demand for new launches, channel inventory post BS-IV and outlook for FY18. Export demand outlook and pricing in key exports markets along with dealer compensation cost for ITC (input tax credit) loss due to GST and comments on 3W demand recovery in domestic market should also be zeroed on.According to KR Choksey Research, Bajaj Auto may post 8.9 per cent YoY in revenue on the back of fall in volumes by 9.5 per cent. However, gross blended realisation to improve by 1.5 per cent YoY driven by refreshment of Pulsar and launch of Dominor.“We expect the EBITDA margin to decline by 196 bps YoY but remain flat QoQ on back of increasing SG&A spend to push inventory, rise in input cost. We expect PAT margins to decline by 80 basis points YoY and remain flat QoQ and expect to post net profit of Rs 805.30 crore.”Shares of Bajaj Auto settled almost flat Rs 2,824.75 on Wednesday, whereas benchmark BSE Sensex closed 244.36 points, or 0.77 per cent, up at 31,955.35.Overall, auto industry since January 2017 has going through a roller coaster ride. Impacted by demonetisation , later by ban on BS-3 vehicles and now in transition towards GST.KR Choksey in a research note said, “While, all the events which has happened in the first part of the year has been instrumental and betterment for the companies and society at large. However, in the near-term disruption caused has been impacting the volumes and the financials of the company.”
NEW DELHI: Shipments of handmade carpets and other floor coverings have been hit badly following the imposition of 18 per cent GST on job works and 12 per cent on their sale or purchase, thereby affecting livelihood of around 20 lakh workers and their families, a trade body said today.The Carpet Export Promotion Council (CEPC) based its findings on feedback received from various carpet manufacturers and exporters associations spread across the country.In a statement, CEPC claimed that almost 5,000 units have been inoperative and are on the verge of closure, spread across the carpet weaving belts.Moreover, exports of carpets and floor coverings worth around Rs 1,000 crore have suffered on account of these production units being non functional."No new orders are being executed and weaving has almost come to a complete closure for new orders. The old orders and old stock is also not moving out of fear of imposition of tax, not getting increased price from buyers due to old contracts and worry on losing money," the Council said.According to CEPC, Indian Carpets are losing their competitiveness in the international market while other countries like China and Turkey are set to benefit and fill the space left by the Indian handmade carpets."And machine-made carpets will quickly fill the lower end of the market and will be imported heavily in India and will add to the imbalance in the foreign exchange and balance of payment," it said.It claimed that export orders worth Rs 2,000 crore have been cancelled as importers have refused to pay incremental cost."This has affected the livelihood of around 20 lakh of workers and their families in the carpet producing belts," the Council said.The affected families mainly belong to carpet producing belts in four states -- Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana and Jammu and Kashmir.
