A country rarely praised for its efficient bureaucracy, India has managed its biggest administrative reform in years pretty well. Its new goods and services tax, replacing 40 other taxes and levies, came into force earlier this month without undue disruption. This policy deserves to be a great success -- but to make the most of it, the government still has work to do. Prime Minister Narendra Modi's previous big idea -- declaring 86 percent of India's banknotes void overnight -- took the public by surprise and caused the economy to seize up. Employers couldn't pay wages and workers couldn't buy even basic staples. The full cost of the disruption is still being calculated. After that, fears about the GST roll-out ran high. Too high, as it turned out. It helped that the plan was not a shock: Successive administrations had debated the idea for years. The government also adjusted the rules to appease various constituencies, and gave businesses a two-month cushion to comply. Partly for that reason, though, the project is far from finished. In excluding certain goods from the scheme, the central government has given state governments discretion to raise taxes on them at any time. Some states have already tried to impose taxes and fees on products already taxed under GST, including automobiles and movie tickets. The infamous customs posts where truck drivers had to halt and fill out paperwork before crossing a state line have begun to come down -- but local officials can still clog the roads by demanding inspections or fees. The new tax is also giving rise to new kinds of regulation. An "anti-profiteering" clause threatens companies with fines or closure if they don't pass GST-related savings on to consumers. All this undermines the whole purpose of GST -- to simplify a complex and fractured system. The design of the tax itself makes things worse. Long negotiations have produced a convoluted structure. Goods are divided into four or five different tax brackets (some are subject to additional "sin" charges as well), in ways that don't always make sense. Hotel rooms are charged at different rates depending on how expensive they are; food at restaurants with air-conditioning is taxed at a higher rate than at those without. This will encourage companies to game the system and agitate for shifting their goods into lower brackets. To head this off, the government should keep working on simplifying the system -- narrowing exemptions as far as possible and reducing the number of tax brackets to one or two. Officials say that this is their eventual goal, but too much delay could be fatal. The longer tax preferences are in place , the harder they'll be to dislodge. Companies will fight to keep their products in lower brackets, and tax officials will resist efforts to curtail their powers. The roll-out went well. But if the government wants this reform to be a lasting success, it can't afford to relax.
Talking to ET Now, Ari Sarker, Co-President, Asia Pacific, MasterCard , says GST is going to be a very critical enabler and take away one of the big reasons why people remain in a cash economy. Edited excerpts:Historically, the market would have seen 25% to 35% volume growth. Clearly it has come down from where it was in November-December and early January but that was unrealistic to sustain. I am fairly bullish. I remain extremely confident that the overall digital growth story is here to stay. GST is going to be another shot in the arm for digital payments and one has to really look at these progressive steps from the government all directed towards creating a vibrant digital economy for a change and I am a big believer that as GST settles and it is going to take a few months and people become more conversant with the benefits of what GST is driving, this is going to be a very critical enabler and take away one of the big reasons why people remain in a cash economy. If you look at our overall plan here in India, we have about 2,000 employees here in India. We have very deep expertise in mobile payments capability. We have very deep capabilities in payment processing and we are bringing all of that to here in India to solve for India’s challenges and I think there more work has to be done. There is a lot of investment. We are investing hundreds of millions of dollars in this space globally and we can do this being a global network and our ability to use those global investments and bring products and services across global markets and at the right price points is what we can deliver with the benefits of scale and we will continue to do that with respect to the India market. In cyber security, we are deeply engaged with the government, we are deeply engaged with the regulator, there is a lot of thought leadership that we are bringing into the India market. We are continuously spending a lot of time with different agencies here in India highlighting the nature of the changing environment and where cyber security challenges are happening across the world. India is not a big revenue market for us today. If you really look at it, we do not disclose numbers because we report to the street. I would say that our excitement for India is not about where things are today, we are excited about India because after a long time, we feel you have a government and a leadership that is serious about Digital India . We also feel excited that the types of steps undertaken with demonetisation, with GST and also India’s extremely innovative culture on technology and innovation gives us great confidence that this market is certainly going to be a very attractive market.
MUMBAI: The Central Board of Direct Taxes ( CBDT ) has clarified that, where the recipient of a service is required to deduct tax at source (TDS) when making a payment to the supplier, the amount of TDS shall be computed without grossing up for the goods and service tax GST ) component, which is also part of the bill. To enable TDS to be computed exclusive of the GST component, it is vital that the GST component is indicated separately, adds the CBDT in its circular issued on Wednesday. The CBDT is continuing with the stand adopted by it earlier in case of service tax, where the amount payable was not grossed up with the service tax component for determining TDS. There are several payments, such as works contracts which attract GST (at 18%) and which also attract TDS (at 10% on fees for technical services) under the Income Tax (I-T) Act. Agreements in the construction sector are prime examples of works contracts, which entail both a supply of goods and services. To illustrate, if the payment under a works contract is Rs 10 lakh, GST will be Rs 1.8 lakh. The issue posed to the CBDT was whether the TDS would be on Rs 11.8 lakh or Rs 10 lakh. If the GST component is indicated separately, CBDT clarifies that TDS will be against Rs 10 lakh which is the income of the service provider . In other words, Rs 1 lakh will be the TDS component. The CBDT has clarified that this circular will also apply to existing contracts entered into before July 1, when GST was introduced.
