MUMBAI: The Centre has created a detailed road map for goods and services tax ( GST audits barely 20 days after the levy’s rollout, listing risks, target industries and even potential auditees for officials examining corporate India’s transition to the new regime.In the past week, the government has reached out to tax commissioners on the audit process, highlighting the risk areas. Beginning next week, therefore, officials could visit companies to assess whether the transition from the multiple to the single producer levy from July 1 stuck to the rule book.Their mode of inspection will also be very different from the traditional script. "They would focus on credit transfer or transition from the old tax regime to GST. The government already has the requisite sets of data in place for this," a tax official told ET on the condition of anonymity.The government has shared sector-wise "risk factors" companies might exploit to avoid paying GST. According to the tax official quoted above, categorisation or risk evaluation for these audits has been created by using Big Data analytics.The government has used statistics of the last two financial years to create the audit checklist.In the internal government note shared with middle-rung tax officials, they have also been told to cause the “least inconvenience” to auditees and to even educate the taxpayers, especially small and medium enterprises (SMEs).Industry experts, however, pointed out that a granular scrutiny could mean additional tax-related effort at many companies, as the GST audits would also take earlier taxes into account while evaluating the transition.“The decision to focus on risk-based parameters in determining the audit plan is good. However, since the audits to be undertaken now would focus on earlier legislation such as excise and service tax, taxpayers will grapple with both the earlier legislation and the new legislation (GST) simultaneously,” said MS Mani, partner, GST, Deloitte India. “It would significantly increase the focus and time taken to attend to tax matters.”A list of auditees, made up of large, medium, and small-scale companies across the country, was also shared with the tax commissioners. “Most of the companies have manipulated the system while transitioning credits from excise and service tax to GST. This is what would be the focus of the tax audits initially,” a senior tax official told ET.Tax officials have been asked to first examine a specific list of companies. This was disclosed in an official communication by the director general of audit, central taxes, on July 12, with several mid-level tax officials being informed this week.Big Data analytics are being used by the tax departments since 2016. The tool is deployed to find outliers in any industry, and the gap from industry based average taxes is used to determine targets for further scrutiny.“The government would have comparables. Say, if 10 consumer goods companies of a particular size pay Rs 50 crore in taxes, it is unlikely that one company, of the same revenue size, would pay Rs 1 crore. Data analytics could easily point out such anomalies, and the lens would then be on such companies,” a person in the know said.
NEW DELHI: The fast moving consumer goods industry witnessed a jump of 5.37% in overall sales volume in the first week of July just after the implementation of the Goods & Services Tax ( GST ), compared to the week before June 15 this year, a research survey by market research firm Brickworks said.Brickworks said the survey captures both modern as well as general trade sales volume and that it was conducted among 2,262 retailers across Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Pune, Bangalore and Ahmedabad.The top two growth categories were cereals and pulses which grew 9.2%, and tea and coffee which reported higher sales of 5.7%. Both milk and milk-based products and edible oils grew 3.7%, while chips and snacks grew 2.8%. However, categories which degrew were personal care products which showed volume sales decline of 7.9% and soft drinks which had lower volumes of 7.8%, according to the study.However many retailers offered huge discounts on the pre GST stock to liquidity sales, the study added.
MUMBAI: Unilever said softening commodity costs and the new Goods and Services Tax regime in India will moderate the Anglo-Dutch consumer goods major’s price growth by 30 basis points at the global level.“We expect price growth to moderate,” Graeme Pitkethly , CFO at Unilever, said on Thursday. “There are two reasons for this. First of all, a little less pressure from commodity cost increases in the second half, and secondly, tax benefits from the introduction of GST in India will be passed onto consumers with an impact at the global Unilever level of around 28 to 30 basis points on price in the second half,” he told analysts after the firm reported a rise in underlying sales of 3% in the first six months of the year.Earlier this week, its Indian unit Hindustan Unilever posted a 6% sales growth with flat volume growth due to trade destocking and reduced buying from one of its largest customer — canteen stores department. However, the maker of Lux soaps and Run detergent said its Indian subsidiary managed through the GST effectively and it expects to recover that volume shortfall in the second half.“In India, the welcome introduction of the new GST prompted distributors and wholesalers to cut back their stocks during the transition period,” Unilever’s global chief Paul Polman told investors.In the run-up to the transition, several consumer companies witnessed destocking of inventory across trade channels, although it was more evident at urban markets.With lower tax of 18% in categories such as hair oil, toothpaste and soaps, consumer goods companies including Hindustan Unilever, Marico and Colgate Palmolive , have started cutting prices either by discounting the existing stock or increasing the grammage of select products.Also, companies are not planning price hikes in case of detergents, shampoos and skin-care products, which under GST attract a higher 28% levy.While several companies are still hand holding vendors, suppliers and distributors to obtain licenses and become GST complaint, retailers are still able to fill just half their shelves due to unavailability of new stock. Most companies expect things to normalise soon and products with slashed prices to hit the market by month-end.
NEW DELHI: The GST Council at its meeting next month is likely to take up taxation issues raised by sectoral bodies along with a review of the implementation of the new tax regime, a top official said.Central Board of Excise and Customs ( CBEC ) Chairperson Vanaja Sarna also said the department is keeping track of revenue trends post the GST rollout from July 1, but actual positions will be known after returns are filed in September.The GST Council, chaired by Finance Minister Arun Jaitley and comprising state counterparts, will meet on August 5 to review implementation of the new tax regime."Different issues will be coming to the table (at the next Council meeting). Things that have been brought to our notice may be on the rules and the implementation. Maybe, even on rates," Sarna told reporters on the sidelines of a Ficci event here.Asked if concerns raised by the textile sector will be taken up, she said "possibly".Certain textile traders have been protesting against 5 per cent GST rate on fabric. They want the tax rate to be zero. Surat-based traders who have been protesting, however, withdrew the strike earlier this week."Whatever issues have been raised... will be taken up (by the Council). When you roll out something as mammoth as GST, I would say you will always find problems or issues probably coming in till six months or a year," Sarna said.Asked about revenues from Customs post July 1, she said revenue has been "good and buoyant".The goods and services tax (GST), rolled out from July 1, is a uniform tax structure that replaces 17 different levies, including excise, service tax and VAT.
PUNE: Bajaj Auto chairman Rahul Bajaj questioned whether demonetisation had achieved its aims while applauding the government for implementing the goods and services tax ( GST ).“It is questionable if it (demonetisation) really worked,” he told Bajaj Auto shareholders at the company’s annual general meeting in Pune on Thursday. “For two months, people had to stand in line, at ATMs, bank branches and small and medium enterprises suffered.”The government announced the withdrawal of Rs 1,000 and Rs 500 notes on November 8 last year in order to combat black money, corruption, counterfeits and terror financing. The move was also aimed at creating a less-cash economy, the government said.“Demonetisation was a favourite (topic) of our PM, no one criticises it… People voted for him (in the Uttar Pradesh assembly elections) still, saying it is just a short-term pain for long-term gain,” he said. “All the economists are waiting for that gain to come. I don’t see that yet.”Bajaj said he wasn’t sure whether the exercise has reined in the parallel economy. “It was said the black money is out, RBI is still not able to count,” he said.“It was said the big black marketeers will suffer, industrialists will suffer, his intention was good, we will have to gain in longterm but nobody suffered. It was mere adjustments, gains we are (still) waiting for.”Bajaj praised the government for implementing GST.“It is very different with GST. It will be good for India, medium term, long term, India will gain,” he said. “Unlike demonetisation, which was a disaster, (where) overnight people had big challenges. I am sure there was no problem with GST. I have not heard of any problem so far, but they will take three-six months to settle down.”In his letter to shareholders, Bajaj said the outlook on the economy is still uncertain.“I thought of starting with encouraging news about India's economic growth in 2016-17, but as I started looking at the latest evidence, it didn't seem as encouraging as I believed it might be,” he said.According to Bajaj, three factors played a key role in dampening growth. “The first is a lack of significant investments over the last four to five years. The second related to private sector investments which were linked to the state of our banks, especially many of those under governments ownership.” The third factor was the temporary negative effect of demonetisation.
