NEW DELHI: The Rs 50,000 threshold for e-way bills under the goods and services tax ( GST ) regime may be raised in order to reduce the scope for harassment and return of the so-called inspector raj.The GST Council may also simplify procedures to improve ease of doing business , said officials aware of the matter. “There is a thinking that it should be raised,” said one official. A proposal to this effect could be taken up when the council, the apex decision-making body for GST, meets on August 5.The council could also discuss rationalisation of tax rates on some goods and services following representations and feedback after GST was implemented on July 1. It will also take stock of implementation, including the tech backbone and ease of filing.An e-way bill is required to transport any item worth more than Rs 50,000 within the country. It is proposed as a permit of sorts in electronic format that will have details of the goods being transported. There are fears it could become a tool of harassment and corruption, undermining GST’s gains.The GST Council is yet to approve the rules governing e-way bills with states divided over whether the framework was needed and the procedures involved.Arriving at a consensus on e-way bills will be critical in resolving one of the key impediments in achieving GST’s fullest benefits.It will help ease the transport of goods across state borders.The council has allowed states to follow existing waybill frameworks until the rules are approved. Initially, the Centre had also opposed e-way bills but gave in to demands by some states. The GST Network will generate e-way bills that will remain valid for one to 15 days, depending on distance.One-day permits will be for distances up to 100 km while a 15-day permit will allow more than 1,000 km transit, according to the draft rules. These could be eased further, said the officials cited above.A tax officer is empowered to intercept any vehicle to verify e-way bills or the goods themselves for all interstate and intrastate movement. GST replaces 17 state and central taxes and 23 cesses, aiming to create a seamless national market in the country. State commercial tax check posts have been dismantled, easing the transport of goods across the country.Efforts are underway to make use of technology by relying on RFID chips and QR codes for non-intrusive monitoring. The logistics industry, especially courier services, have expressed concerns over the proposed e-way bills.
NEW DELHI: The government estimates that total registrations, old and new, under the goods and services tax GST ) will add up to between 90 lakh and one crore by the end of the financial year, substantially increasing the tax base and ushering in greater compliance.Official sources said multiple registrations under VAT, excise and service tax are expected to be eliminated once GST is fully implemented, and this will mean that the total number of old registrations will drop from 86 lakh to around 70 lakh.However, the addition of those businesses that go out of the tax net and even entire sectors like textiles will push the registrations to close to a crore or 10 million.This will mean the number of tax assessees could jump between 28% (if registrations touch 90 lakh) and 40% (if registrations touch a crore) over the older registrations that have migrated to the new regime, sources said.A drop in the older registrations is explained, said officials, by a reduction in multiple registrations under VAT, service tax and excise.So, the increase in the number of tax assessees is calculated on the basis of the number of businesses that have migrated to the new regime.Government officials are breathing a little easier as the initial rollout has not resulted in any serious or prolonged disruptions. The number of new registrations is increasing, having touched 11 lakh over the weekend.Protests by the textile sector in Gujarat in particular do not seem to have moved the Centre, which is not keen to make an exemption.“This gives us comfort that there is a horizontal expansion of base. This will also lead to greater compliance,” finance minister Arun Jaitley said in Chennai.On Saturday, a new milestone was reached as new registrations crossed the 10 lakh mark. About two lakh new registrations are pending.The sharp spurt in new registrations has brought cheer to policymakers who were expecting an increase in the tax base. Widening of the tax base and pushing up growth are two of the key benefits of GST identified by the government.Sources said that the number of new registrations may go up as businesses have time to register with GST netowrk (GSTN), the IT backbone as and when they cross the threshold of Rs 20 lakh.Economists also expect a significant expansion in the tax base even if 8-9 lakh of the 12 lakh new registrations file returns. The government’s drive against black money has also resulted in a sharp uptick in returns being filed on the direct taxes side as well.An overall expansion of the tax base augurs well for the economy and may ultimately help the government in lowering tax rates.
BENGALURU: In spite of India generating 1.85 million tonne of electronic waste annually and being ranked among the top five countries of e-waste generation, e-waste has not been categorised separately under the new GST regime.Today, India has 1 billion mobile subscribers, around 57 million computers along with other gadgets and consumer electronics users. But only 1.5 % of the e-waste generated here gets recycled, according to Assocham and KPMG's study of 2016.Akshay Jain, director, Namo e-waste, says: “GST rate on scrap is 18% and for computer and electronics, it is 28%. There is no mention of e-waste or computerIT scrap in the list of items under GST and hence, there's no clarity.““We are not able to find the item code for our category. Different electronics are scheduled under different rates of GST,“ Jain added.Currently, e-waste players have to pay 10% extra tax and take a refund from the government after 90 days, which makes the entire ordeal complicated. Jain also adds that noting India is the fifth largest producer of e-waste and is also a major importer of e-waste from leading generating regions such as USA, China, and the EU, GST should have been clearly defined for this sector.Prabir Chetia, head ­ business research & advisory, Aranca ­ a global research and advisory firm ­ says e-waste has not been explicitly defined under the GST rate schedule, indicating the industry has been overlooked.“The GST rate is clearly defined for a very limited range of electronic scrap or waste, which comprise certain types of cells, batteries and accumulators, and the applicable rate is 18%. Further, GST rate for electronic products varies from 5% to 28%, depending on the type of electronic product.“Bharati Chaturvedi, the director of Chintan Environmental Research and Action Group, says: “The company that is recycling scrap will now have to pay 18% GST, which will lead to the cost being passed down, thus heavily affecting the wastepickers. Earlier, if they were given ` . 118, today they will earn ` . 100. Instead, they will prefer going to the kabadiwalas, which will not include these taxes“.“If these rates continue, in the long run, recycling is bound to slowdown, leading to e-waste being rendered useless. This chain will eventually lead to more toxic fumes as well as increase poverty“.
NEW DELHI: Post the Goods & Services Tax (GST) roll out earlier this month, the Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Exhibitions (MICE) related activities have been hit hard according to hotel associations. One of the anomalies that emerged post GST roll out was that MICE activities and other events held in hotels outside of home state are not eligible for Input Tax Credit (ITC).This has been leading to cancellations and postponements for pre booked events. Given the emergence of MICE Tourism as one of the fastest growing segments, and its potential to disrupt growth, the Hotel and Restaurant Association of Western India ( HRAWI ) has appealed to the Government to revisit this particular aspect of the GST.“There is an overall reduction in MICE bookings across hotels in India as compared to the same period last year. Advance bookings are being cancelled and new bookings are not happening. Most companies are considering holding events in the same state where they are registered under GST. Businesses may still have digested the high GST, but without ITC, it just becomes unviable. MICE tourism is too important a segment for the nation to overlook,” says Dilip Datwani, president, HRAWI.Talking about the GST slabs for the industry he adds, “The 28 % GST rate for rooms with tariff of Rs 7500 and above is one of the highest in the world and will seriously affect cash flow. Moreover, the tax percentage will be determined based on the published or declared rate which is creating a lot of hardship for the industry. The association has appealed the Government to remove this condition and determine the tax percentage based on the actual transaction value and has also requested to review the ITC clause for interstate accommodations.”The disruption following the GST rollout comes close on the heel of liquor ban on highways. With revenues already hit, this comes as a double whammy. Many hotels will find it difficult to sustain business and may close down or may have to scale down operations which are expected to result in job losses and de-growth, HRAWI stated.“The non-refund or non-receipt of ITC for businesses holding MICE in states other than the ones they operate in is the biggest drawback of GST for hospitality. ITC is available if the entity arranging the MICE has their GST registered in the State where it’s held and also unfortunately ITC on Integrated Goods & Services Tax (IGST) is not applicable for the hotel industry. Not receiving a set-off for an expense will be discouraging for any business to conduct MICE outside of their state.This will translate to such enterprises either holding MICE in their respective states or they go to a country where not only the taxes are lower but also mostly get the tax refund by that country on exit. We are engaging with the tourism ministry in this regard and hopefully the clause will be altered to encompass MICE for ITC,” says Mr Kamlesh Barot, past President, HRAWI & Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India (FHRAI).Meanwhile, the hospitality industry recently received clarity on the tax rates applicable for luxury or 5 star hotels. Luxury hotels were to levy a default 28% GST irrespective of the room tariffs. However effective immediately the GST rate even for these hotels will be based on the published tariff rates and only if the tariff is Rs.7500 and above then will it attract a GST of 28%.
