The economy will recover in the next six months as the issues arising out of demonetisation and the Goods and Services Tax (GST) are easing out, Road Transport and Highways Minister Nitin Gadkari said on Wednesday. “I feel that we should wait for six months. Both measures [demonetisation and the GST] will yield results. The situation will improve. When you buy a brand new car, you face some problems in adjusting to it,” he said, reacting to the criticism by former Union Ministers. Mr. Gadkari said in an interview that demonetisation and the GST were the “biggest reform measures.” “We are sorting out the problems faced by industry due to GST. The problems are subsiding. It’s too early to judge these measures,” he said. Former Union Minister Arun Shourie called the demonetisation effected last year the world’s “largest money-laundering scheme” in an interview to NDTV. “I don’t agree with his views. All the money deposited in bank accounts will have to be accounted for. Black money in the economy will be reduced substantially,” Mr. Gadkari said. Recently, former Union Finance Minister Yashwant Sinha wrote an article criticising the government for making a “mess” of the economy. Last month, former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh told CNBC-TV18 in an interview that “hasty” implementation of the GST and demonetisation were bound to hit the GDP. During the interaction, Mr. Gadkari said he would ask Ministry officials to clear all pending proposals for highway and shipping projects from the State governments so as to boost the economy. “The Finance Ministry has told all Departments to increase expenditure. To begin with, I will ensure that all pending projects and proposals of the State governments are cleared,” he said.
Services sector activity in India expanded for the first time in three months in September as it rebounded from GST—related contractions, driven by a surge in new business orders that supported job creation, a monthly survey said today.
The Nikkei India Services PMI Business Activity Index rose to 50.7 in September - from 47.5 in August -— a reading that pointed to a slight pace of expansion. In PMI parlance, a print above 50 means expansion while a score below that denotes contraction. The combination of marketing campaigns by companies and strengthening demand conditions led to new business growth in September, according to the survey. The latest services PMI follows the manufacturing one announced on Tuesday which showed that industrial activity registered the second straight month of expansion in September. Accordingly, the Nikkei India Composite PMI Output Index, which maps both manufacturing and services sectors, rose to 51.1 in September, from 49 in August.

“The Indian private sector regained some lost ground since the implementation of July’s GST as service providers followed the manufacturing industry back to growth,” said Aashna Dodhia, Economist at IHS Markit, and author of the report.

The improving economic environment supported job creation, with services employment increasing at the fastest rate in almost six-and-a-half years.

“The labour market was strengthened over the month as the pace of job creation quickened to the fastest since mid—2011, led by the transport and storage and consumer services sub-sectors,” Dodhia said.

On the inflation front, input cost accelerated in September while output charges rose at the weakest rate since June.

The survey further noted that service providers remained optimistic towards growth prospects over the coming 12 months, but their confidence dropped to a three-month low at the end of the third quarter (July=September).

Dodhia, however, noted that the composite PMI for the July-September quarter indicated the lowest average since October-December 2013 “as the private sector transitions from recent structural shocks“.

The Reserve Bank, in its policy review meet on October 4, kept benchmark interest rate unchanged on fears of rising inflation while lowering growth forecast to 6.7 % for the current fiscal.
more-in

Having witnessed flat sales due to factors such as Goods and Services Tax (GST) and demonetisation, Coca-Cola India is gearing up for growth phase. Its newly-appointed president T. Krishnakumar talks about the roadmap and challenges among other things.

You have been with Coke for long. How challenging is your new task?

While I am new to Coca-Cola India Business Unit, I’ve been in the Coca-Cola system for quite some time. I have been leading the company-owned bottling unit, Hindustan Coca-Cola Beverages, for over a decade. So, I am not completely new to the business, but yes, I am new to this job.

Basically, my thought process is very simple. In the past, we have seen good growth for many years. In the recent past some macro-economic factors did create a bit of a slowdown in our business. However, I think we are now over all of that and poised for growth. My responsibility is to facilitate the acceleration [of] a lot of initiatives that have been started a few years back to reach next level of success.

Can you elaborate on your new approach?

At a global level, there is a new strategic direction given by our global CEO James Quincey.

We are evolving into a company that can provide ‘beverages for life.’ We will continue to focus on our consumer-centric portfolio. The idea is to have a portfolio and not just a collection of brands. That’s going to be my big role now in working with the team to ensure that we move the company quickly in all the spheres.

What kind of transition is Coke going through?

This transition is to become a total beverages company by enhancing our offerings to the world. We will continue to focus on our consumer-centric portfolio. Brand Coca-Cola will always be the heart and soul of The Coca-Cola Company but the company is much bigger than the core brand. I believe this transition is a very positive one.

What are your short and long-term priorities?

Both would be to give best choice for the consumers and in India, we will localise these choices. The second priority is to create a ‘Virtuous Fruit Circular Economy’ of sustainable agriculture (horticulture), a Coca-Cola India’s flagship initiative by using a variety of Indian fruits in its beverages under the juice and aerated drinks categories. Through this initiative The Coca-Cola Company, its bottling partners and its fruit suppliers and processors in India, will contribute over $1.7 billion in the agri ecosystem of the country over the next five years, spanning the entire supply chain from grove to glass. We believe this is a transitional initiative which will make us an important stakeholder in the Indian economy.

Were you affected by demonetisation?

We had a short-term slowdown in demand because of lack of liquidity with customers on account of demonetisation since most of our consumers buy our products at small stores. We actually used this as an opportunity to introduce digital payments and e-payments through a partnership with SBI.

Did cola majors witness a slump in Tamil Nadu sales last year?

Yes. It was due to a call by Tamil Nadu traders to boycott soft drinks. It was a learning for us and we are now more aware and making efforts at communicating on the role we play in enabling the local community.

While there is a much better appreciation and understanding of the role we play in the local economy, we are also making all efforts to connect better with the State.

We are evolving into a company that can provide ‘beverages for life’

How was your growth in the last few quarters?

We had a fantastic 10 years and grew very well. Last few were flattish but I believe that every company has the process of renewing it and now we are in it. This year for us was more about preparation for the long term.

However, we believe there is serious opportunity that exists simply because we could penetrate a lot more in terms of distribution. But at the same time, we have to provide larger choice to the consumer to ensure that we are present across all segments.

India has close to 800 million consumers who are not exactly middle class, and another 450 million who are middle class, and then you have 50 million people who are very affluent. We believe by expanding our portfolio we will be recruiting more people into our portfolio. We also believe our sparkling portfolio will grow. But to grow faster we need to have a larger portfolio and we don’t want to use the same offerings to cut across all segments. So we are getting into more segmented portfolio approach.

We are well-prepared and we should see the year now to start picking up.

Besides, cola producers were prevented to draw water from Thamirabarani river. What is the current status?

That was under litigation. It has been sorted out and the matter has reached a suitable conclusion. We usually take water from SIDCO which is an industrial association and follow all rules and regulation. So there is no issue as such.

People are now getting more health conscious. In this scenario do you think your goal of increasing the number of customers can be achieved easily?

I must first state that none of our beverages are unhealthy. What we provide is choices, for different occasions and different priorities. Some of our products are indulgence, some others are nutrition, some provide functional benefits etc. We will play our part in offering choice and shaping choice but eventually, it is for the consumers to decide. We believe there is a serious opportunity as there is a lot to penetrated in terms of the distribution. At the same time, we have to enlarge the portfolio to ensure we straddle all segments. We believe that by expanding this portfolio we will be adding more and more consumers. We are getting into greater segmentation and creating appropriate brands to carry the portfolio for that segment. As far as sparkling beverages are concerned, there is room to grow.

Was there a price raise due to Goods and Services Tax?

We have our own ways of managing these sorts of situation. We call it the OPPBC (Occasion Brand Pack Price and Channel). We always have to ensure that the consumer gets the right value. We can’t straight away jump into a price hike. We have to ensure that the consumer sees much lesser impact. In terms of GST, it’s a great thing and it improves agility, while ensuring that we can go from anywhere in India. It’s now a unified large market. But, having said that, we would have perhaps been better off if the tax was slightly lower.

What are your views on taxing aerated drinks by 40%?

Am I disappointed with a higher tax rate for a certain part of the portfolio? Yes, everybody likes to have favourable taxation. We believe GST is a great legislation, which will give us a lot of efficiencies and a lot of freedom to operate. So we see great opportunities coming out of it. But I am a person who respects decision taken by any government. I manage my business with taxation.

Would that mean a few pricing changes on a few packs or brands? Yes. But at the same time would there be value offerings that will offset this pricing? Absolutely yes! So you will see us emerge in the coming months with a very balanced portfolio which addresses the needs of all kinds of consumer - from a consumer who is at the bottom of the pyramid to a consumer who is affluent. So we will ensure everybody gets a high quality product at a price they can afford.

What is your global standing vis-à-vis competition?

India is ranked sixth in terms of volume sales in the Coca-Cola system. We would like to see India as the fifth largest market in the near future. As our global President and CEO, James Quincey recently announced, in the longer term, India has the potential to be amongst top three Coca-Cola markets worldwide,

Your market share in India?

We want to be a significant player in India. We are the leaders in non-alcoholic beverages. We are not at liberty to give the exact numbers.
more-in

The services sector expanded in September, recovering from two months of Goods and Services Tax-related contraction, according to a private sector survey.

The Nikkei India Services Purchasing Managers’ Index registered a reading of 50.7, indicating slight expansion. A reading above 50 denotes expansion while one below 50 indicates a contraction.

“The Indian service sector recovered from the GST-related contractions registered in the previous two months, as signalled by renewed increases in new business and output,” the report said. “Greater workloads supported job creation in September, with the rate of employment growth the strongest since June 2011.”

“Edging above the no-change mark of 50.0 in September, the seasonally adjusted Nikkei India Services PMI Business Activity Index pointed to a return to growth of output,” the report added. “Companies indicated that the combination of marketing campaigns and strengthening demand conditions led to new business growth in September.”

The report said respondents remained optimistic about growth prospects over the coming 12 months. However, the report also noted that current business confidence fell to a three-month low at the end of the third quarter
