India’s economic growth for 2017 and 2018 will be slower than earlier projections, the International Monitory Fund (IMF) said in its latest World Economic Outlook released on Tuesday. The report cited “lingering impact” of demonetisation and the Goods and Services Tax for the expected slow down during the current and the next year. The IMF projected India to grow at 6.7% in 2017 and 7.4% in 2018, which are 0.5 and 0.3 percentage points less than the projections earlier this year, respectively. India’s slowdown is happening while the world economy is picking up steam and is projected to grow faster than earlier calculations, in 2017 and 2018. The IMF has revised upwards “global growth projections to 3.6% for this year and 3.7% for next — in both cases 0.1 percentage point above our previous forecasts,” Maurice Obstfeld, IMF Economic Counsellor and Director of Research, said at a press conference at the beginning of the World Bank-IMF annual meetings. Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley will attend the meetings. “Among emerging market and developing economies, higher domestic demand in China and continued recovery in key emerging market economies supported growth in the first half of 2017. In India, growth momentum slowed, reflecting the lingering impact of the authorities’ currency exchange initiative as well as uncertainty related to the midyear introduction of the country-wide Goods and Services Tax,” the IMF report said. The report said: “pickups in investment, trade, and industrial production, coupled with strengthening business and consumer confidence, are supporting the recovery,” globally. “With growth outcomes in the first half of 2017 generally stronger than expected, upward revisions to growth are broad based, including for the Euro area, Japan, China, emerging Europe, and Russia,” it said, noting that the downwards revisions for the United States, the United Kingdom, and India are offset by the global positive trends. The IMF, meanwhile, has revised upwards, India’s growth performance for 2016 in its latest calculations, owing to strong government spending and “data revisions in India,” which is now 7.1 percent as opposed to 6.8% in April. The report said the downward revisions for 2017 and 2018 reflect “still lingering disruptions associated with the currency exchange initiative introduced in November 2016, as well as transition costs related to the launch of the national Goods and Services Tax in July 2017.” The report, however, strikes a positive note on the medium term impact of GST. It “promises the unification of India’s vast domestic market, is among several key structural reforms under implementation that are expected to help push growth above 8% in the medium term,” the report said. In 2015, the Indian economy had grown at 8%. Mr. Jaitley told a gathering in New York on October 9 that the implementation of GST has been going on smooth and accused Opposition parties of trying to “derail” it. "Many attempts have been made by political groups to derail the GST, but I am glad that their own state governments are not listening to them because they know 80 per cent of the money is going to come to them so they don't have to appease an ill-informed central leader of the party and let the revenues of their own state suffer," he said at an event organized by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and the U.S.-India Business Council (USIBC). “…There are going to be different complaints — some legitimate, some manufactured,”the Minister said, adding that the government needs to have capacity to distinguish between a genuine and a manufactured complaint. Mr. Jaitley said the GST Council met every month and reviews the situation to make amends to the programme. "It's been a fairly smooth transition," he said.
India’s GDP may slow from 8.6% in 2015 to 7.0% in 2017 because of disruptions by demonetisation and the GST, the World Bank has forecast and warned that subdued private investment due to internal bottlenecks could put downside pressures on the country’s potential growth.The International Monetary Fund on Tuesday also lowered India’s growth projection to 6.7 % in 2017, 0.5 percentage points less than its previous two forecasts and slower than China’s 6.8%. India’s economic momentum has been affected by disruptions from the withdrawal of banknotes and uncertainties around the Goods and Services Tax (GST), the World Bank said in its South Asia Economic Focus, a biannual economic update. As a result, growth is expected to slow from 8.6% in 2015 to 7.0% in 2017. Sound policies around balancing public spending with private investment could accelerate growth to 7.3% by 2018, it said. While sustained growth is expected to translate to continued poverty reduction, more focus could be made to help benefit the informal economy more, said the report released here ahead of the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. A slowdown in India’s growth rate, the bank said, has also affected the growth rate of South Asia. As a result, South Asia has fallen to second place after East Asia and the Pacific. “Real GDP growth slowed to 7.1 % in 2016, from 8 % in 15/16, and further to 5.7 % in Q1 FY2017,” it said. On the one hand, public and private consumption gained pace: after implementation of the 7th central pay commission recommendations; and due to the revival in rural demand after normal monsoon and agricultural impetus. On the other hand, overall demand slowed as public investments started to wane. According to the bank, the GST is expected to disrupt economic activity in early 2018, but the momentum may pick-up. Evidence suggests that post-GST, manufacturing and services contracted sharply, it said. The growth activity is expected to stabilise within a quarter — maintaining the annual GDP growth at 7.0 % in 2018. Growth is projected to increase gradually to 7.4 % by 2020, underpinned by a recovery in private investments, which are expected to be crowded—in by the recent increase in public capex and an improvement in the investment climate (partly due to the passage of the GST and Bankruptcy Code, and measures to attract the FDI), the bank report said. The most substantial medium-term risks are associated with private investment recovery, which continues to face several domestic impediments such as corporate debt overhang, regulatory and policy challenges, along with the risk of an imminent increase in US interest rates, it said. “If the internal bottlenecks are not alleviated, subdued private investment would put downside pressures on India’s potential growth,” the report said. Downside risks to the global economy — and accordingly to export growth and capital flows — are also substantial given the possibility of monetary policy normalisation in the USA and risks of protectionism, it added.
