ITC Ltd. reported a 5.6% rise in net profit for the second quarter ended September 30, driven mainly by its paper and new FMCG businesses. Net profit stood at ₹2,639.8 crore for the quarter and ₹5,200.3 crore for the first half of 2017-18 compared with ₹4,884.7 crore a year earlier. The company said that its performance was subdued as the legal cigarette industry volumes were under severe pressure due to the sharp increase in tax incidence under the GST regime. Performance in the hotels segment was impacted by the renovation work at ITC Maurya and ITC Maratha as also the highway liquor ban, it said. Agri-business revenue growth remained subdued, the company said, on account of limited trading opportunities in agri-commodities and tobacco leaf shortage due to the drought in Andhra Pradesh in 2016. Profitability in this segment was hit by a steep increase in leaf farm prices and adverse crop quality. Revenues in the paperboards and specialty papers segment too was hit by subdued demand in the FMCG and legal cigarette industries, zero duty imports under the free trade agreement with ASEAN countries and Chinese imports, an ITC release said. Despite the sluggish demand, revenues in ITC’s new FMCG business increased as did profitability, driven by enhanced scale and improved realisation. ITC recorded a gross sales value (net of rebates and discounts) of ₹16,391.5 crore in Q2. The figure was ₹15,769.8 crore a year earlier. ITC said that in view of the restructuring of indirect taxes post GST, gross revenue from sale of products and services and excise duty for the quarter and six months ended September 30, 2017 were not comparable with previous periods. Brokerage Edelweiss Securities said ITC results were in line with estimates. It said that the food and personal care segment has done well on the sales and margin fronts with the ‘premiumisation’ theme ‘working well’
State—owned Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) on Friday reported an 18% rise in second quarter net profit on the back of higher refining margin and inventory gains.Net profit in July—September at ₹696.29 crore or ₹7.80 per share, was 18.4% higher than ₹3,121.89 crore or ₹6.59 a share, in the year—ago period, IOC chairman Sanjiv Singh told reporters here.“Our sales increased and we recorded robust refining margins in the second quarter,” he said. IOC earned $7.98 on turning every barrel of crude oil into fuel in the quarter compared to $4.32 per barrel gross refining margin (GRM) in the same period last fiscal. The company also had an inventory gain of ₹1,056 crore in July—September as against a loss of ₹686 crore in the previous fiscal, he said. Inventory gain kicks in when a company buys crude oil at a particular rate, but by the time it is able to process and turn it into fuel, the rates have gone up, resulting in higher value for the product. Reverse of this results in inventory loss. Mr. Singh said that since petrol, diesel and jet fuel (ATF or aviation turbine fuel) have been kept out of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime, the company had a ₹300 crore hit on pre—tax profits. Under GST, tax paid on inputs can be set off against tax due on final product. Since the three fuels along with crude oil and natural gas are out of GST, any tax they pay on input goods and services cannot be recovered or set off against final tax on products, resulting in a loss.
