The World Bank Group on Tuesday released its latest Doing Business report that assessed reforms implemented in 190 countries from June 2, 2016 to June 1, 2017. India was ranked 100th among 190 countries, up from 130th last year. In an interview to The Hindu, Junaid Ahmad, the Country Director for the World Bank in India, explained the reasons for the huge jump in India’s ranking as well as the likely impact of demonetisation exercise and the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime on India’s near-term prospects. Significantly, Mr. Ahmad suggested the need for institutionalising a Central nodal body on ‘ease of doing business’ reforms initiatives to help India break into the top 50 soon. (Excerpts from the interview) How do you explain this huge jump, particularly to the Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) at a time when the general perception is that the demonetisation exercise and hasty implementation of the GST regime have made it difficult for them to do business? Isn’t there an apparent contradiction when you say it has become easier to do business here? I don’t think there is a contradiction. Reforms take a little while to be picked up. What you are seeing today is not just the shift of the last 12 months, but of the last three years. So the perseverance in policy shift is being picked up now. Also, it takes time to hit the ground. Policies get changed, but behaviour don’t change immediately. You are now beginning to see SMEs and larger enterprises recognise the changes that have been introduced and they are reacting to it. Besides, the government has introduced a user-feedback system this year in particular, and using the feedback system they have been able to adapt and adjust wherever they saw certain bottlenecks. All these have slowly begun to get reflected in the indicators that we use to measure ease of doing business. That would be the real point. Our set of indicators don’t capture everything. Demonetisation and other factors are not captured in our set of indicators. We are very precise because we do a comparison across 190 countries. In those areas, it is very clear that India has made a huge advancement.
