With all grades of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) coming under GST, consumers in India will be paying more from this month for their cooking gas cylinders. While petroleum is not under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) that rolled out from July 1, the central government clarified that day that both domestic and commercial liquefied LPG grades will be taxed under the GST, which is now effective pan-India except in Jammu and Kashmir. LPG has been placed in the lowest 5 per cent GST bracket, the other rates in the new indirect tax structure being 12, 18 and 28 per cent. Pre-GST, most states did not tax LPG, while others levied value added tax (VAT) ranging between 2 per cent and 4 per cent. Domestic LPG attracted zero custom and excise duty. Post-GST implementation, an LPG cylinder will cost around Rs 12-15 more in states that did not tax the clean fuel. Instead, in states that levied VAT, the increase will depend on the difference between earlier tax and the GST rate. The price of commercial LPG, however, has come down under the GST regime, where the tax on this category of item is at 18 per cent. Previously, LPG for commercial use attracted 22.5 per cent tax, including 8 per cent excise duty and 14.5 per cent VAT. A commercial LPG cylinder earlier available in Delhi for Rs 1,121, will now cost Rs 1,052. The lower GST on commercial LPG signifies lower prices also for auto LPG, thereby giving further boost to the use of this environment friendly fuel. On including petroleum under the GST regime, the matter has been tabled before the GST Council, which is yet to decide on it.
Domestic manufacturers of electronic components will benefit from the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime as the cost of manufacturing will be significantly brought down, a study said here on Monday. "The local manufacturers will be able to pass on the tax benefit to consumers in the form of price reduction," said the study "Electricals and Electronics Manufacturing in India", jointly conducted by Assocham and NEC Technologies. The study observed that multiple taxes and cascading effects of taxes will be eliminated with the implementation of the GST. Along with these benefits, firms will also be saving expenses incurred in warehousing and logistics which stood at approximately 5-8 per cent, the study noted. "The lower taxes, simplified tax structure and technology empowered tax compliance system will provide an ideal ecosystem to improve the current situation of electronics manufacturing in India," said the study. The study added that "GST will give a major boost to the Indian electronics industry thereby, leading to subsequent increase in demand of locally manufactured electronics". "With the implementation of GST, the electronics manufacturers will reap in significant cost savings in warehousing and logistics," said the Assocham-NEC study. The report noted that even the government's demonetisation move gave a boost to electronic payment devices with the value of transactions getting almost doubled. Besides, it is also certain to bring about innovations in electronic payment industry thereby leading to increase in number of point of sale (PoS) and mPoS (mobile point of sale) devices. "Post demonetisation, the government has been promoting digital payments by introducing e-payments platforms such as BHIM, Bharat QR. All of these platforms will generate more demand for mobile phone," the report said. The study recommended that for India to become a robust manufacturing hub, it should focus on building capabilities across the value chain by reducing component imports and increasing local value addition. 
With a view to clear the doubts and bust myths surrounding the newly-implemented Goods and Services Tax (GST) system, the Haryana government will organise seminars at every district headquarters in the state in the next one week. These seminars would be attended by representatives of manufacturing associations, traders, chartered accountants, 34 empanelled service providers and elected representatives of the respective areas. Additional Chief Secretary, Excise and Taxation Department, Sanjeev Kaushal said that detailed discussion regarding GST system would be held at these meetings to clear all doubts and make people aware about the benefits of the system. Replying to a question, he said that phosphorous fertilisers contain several elements such as phosphoric acid, which are taxed separately. As per the report of the tax research unit, while earlier 7.25 per cent to 9.25 per cent tax was levied on fertiliser, this has now been reduced to five per cent. “We expect that prices of fertilisers would be more reasonable in future,” he added. Replying to a question about agriculture, tractor and fertiliser, he said that some information in this regard was missing. The GST Council has fixed tax rates for tractor parts to be used only in tractors at 18 per cent, and those which could be used in other machinery at 28 per cent. At the time of fixing slabs, goods were placed in the tax band nearest to the sum of the Central Tax, Value Added Tax (VAT) and embedded tax charged on them earlier. Therefore, tax rates on most goods have reduced, he added. Kaushal further stated that review meeting of GST Council would be held on August 5, in which the Council would take several decisions regarding implementation of the system. 