The GST feel-good went some notches higher as the Sensex rallied 132 points on Tuesday — bringing up gains for the fourth straight day — with metal, banking and realty stocks ticking all the right boxes. Asian cues offered hope, backed by a record close in the US, which emboldened investors. The 30-share index was up 131.84 points, or 0.42 per cent, at 31,353.46. Sectoral indices led by metal, realty, power, consumer durables, oil and gas, auto and banking made headway. The gauge had gained 387.30 points in the previous three sessions making a strong bet on the Goods and Services Tax (GST). The NSE Nifty today went up 35.65 points, or 0.37 per cent, to 9,650.65. Prominent gainers were Reliance Industries, Adani Ports, Tata Motors, ICICI Bank and ONGC, rising by up to 1.61 per cent. NTPC too rose 1.02 per cent to Rs 158.20 on reports of the company considering bonus shares issue. Japan's Nikkei was up 0.43 per cent while Hong Kong's Hang Seng index rose 0.05 per cent in morning trade. Shanghai composite, however, shed 0.49 per cent. The US Dow Jones Industrial Average ended at record high by rising 0.61 per cent yesterday.
Implementation of GST, albeit complex, will remove domestic trade barriers and help boost GDP growth over long term, but poses significant short-term risks, Fitch Ratings said on Tuesday. The four slab Goods and Services Tax (GST) was rolled out from July 1. The new regime taxes various goods and services at 5, 12, 18 and 28 per cent, while keeping essential commodities out. “The GST that came into effect on 1 July is relatively complex, including multiple tax rates for different goods – ranging from 0-28 per cent, or higher where 'sin taxes' are applied – and requires frequent filing in all states in which a company operates,” Fitch said. However, it is “far simpler” than the previous system, under which each state set its own sales taxes – in addition to the central government – and imposed border taxes on goods entering the state. “GST will unify the indirect tax system and remove domestic barriers to trade, which should support productivity gains and GDP growth over the long term,” Fitch said. The US-based credit rating agency said that the new indirect tax regime is unlikely to increase revenue in the short term. However, it said, the new regime is likely to boost revenue indirectly over the long term as it supports GDP growth and encourages tax compliance. “There are significant short-term risks involved in the GST implementation, emphasised by the late changes to the bill and the disruptive roll-out of demonetisation,” Fitch said. The unified national system should offer significant opportunities for productivity, it said, adding that it will become much quicker and less costly to move goods across the country now that trucks will not be held up at checkpoints at state borders. “Smoother logistics should reduce retailers' need for working capital and allow them to operate centralised warehouses, rather than in every state. Supply chains could extend, encouraging specialisation, now that there is less incentive to source goods within state borders,” it said. Tax filing may also become less time-consuming as a result of the new electronic system. Large companies will now have an incentive to pressure smaller suppliers into compliance. The new electronic filing system is also likely to lead to more tax reporting. Moreover, the tax base will be broadened, as SMEs with sales of only Rs 20 lakh will now be exempt from paying GST, down from Rs 1.5 crore. “Small informal retailers – which account for over 90 per cent of retail sales – should also find it harder to understate their sales or to avoid filing tax returns altogether in a system where transactions are tracked throughout the supply chain. This could accelerate the shift toward organised retail,” it said. The informal sector is very large, accounting for over 20 per cent of GDP and 80 per cent of employment, and is largely untaxed. This is one of the reasons why government revenue is low, at just 21.4 per cent of GDP in 2016, compared with a median of 29.9 per cent for 'BBB' range sovereigns. Fitch said smaller firms, many of which still keep their books manually, are likely to find the transition particularly difficult. It said India's large bureaucracy is likely to be tested by the new system, with further potential implications for businesses. For example, delays in processing tax returns and paying out refunds might create cash flow problems. Also multiple GST rates are likely to lead to disputes over which goods fall into which category and could add to strains on the judicial system, Fitch said.
While the sports sector overall has been impacted by the July 1 rollout of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) with equipment cost and price of entry tickets for tournaments attracting up to 28 per cent tax, the FIFA U-17 World Cup tickets would not be affected, according to Local Organising Committee (LOC) tournament director Javier Ceppi. "We had taken a conscious decision to keep our tickets prices economical, because we wanted universal access to the World Cup," Ceppi told IANS over phone. According to the new indirect tax regime ushered in at the stroke of midnight on July 1, tickets priced below Rs.250 will be exempt from GST. Ceppi said that while most World Cup tickets will be priced below Rs 250, those few that fall in the higher bracket would not cost the buyer much due to the pan-India indirect taxation reform. "Most of our tickets have been priced below the Rs 250 threshold and will not attract GST, so it is something that was resolved even before GST came into effect. For the few tickets we have over Rs 250, we will not pass on any extra cost due to GST to the fans and we will follow all regulations and procedures as established in the law," the Chilean added. The first phase of World Cup tickets had a discount of 60 percent on the minimum priced tickets to those buying tickets in block for all the matches at a venue. But post-GST rollout where the Indian Premier League will attract the highest tax slab of 28 per cent, other events organised by national sports federations (NSFs) will attract 18 per cent on tickets. The cost of a number of sporting equipment will also shoot up. City-based India batsman Manoj Tiwary urged the cricket coaching centres to come forward and help budding cricketers, who are from financially weak background, with basic kit. "If prices of helmets and bats go up, it will definitely be difficult for the not so rich ones to afford them. We have a lot of talent in suburbs and not everyone there can afford expensive equipment. Post-GST, if prices of these things go up, my personal opinion is that cricket coaching centres should help the needy ones with a basic kit," Tiwar told IANS. Tiwary, who has been part of IPL since its inception in 2008, however, felt the brand value of IPL is such that it won't be affected even if ticket prices go up from season 11. Before GST, sports manufacturers were paying two percent excise duty on goods, according to the charge imposed on them in 2011. But post-July 1, their goods have come under the 12-28 percent slab. According to a sports store manager here, his store has remained empty since July 1. "Since the GST has come into force, the prices of gym equipment have shot up as it is under 28 per cent slab. The dealers are also skeptical in selling products to us as the entire scenario is still unclear," Indrajit Mitra of 'Energie' sports shop in south Kolkata's Triangular Park said. "If, say, the price of a helmet or a bat goes up from Rs 100 to Rs 110, it's okay. But if it is 150, it's a problem. The footfall in our shop has decreased considerably since July 1," Mitra added. Former Olympian shooter Joydeep Karmakar, who runs a shooting academy here, said the impact of GST will be both good and bad. "The good part is that the entry tax that was levied on the Bengal border in the pre-GST days when equipment from Delhi or Mumbai used to come will not be there anymore. That is a major advantage for us," Karmakar, who missed a bronze medal in the 2012 London Olympics 50m prone event by less than a two-point margin, told IANS. Karmakar said there are still issues which need to be looked at like equipment arriving from abroad. "We have 80 per cent of our equipment coming from abroad. Post-GST, whether their shipment cost will go up, is still unclear. Another good thing is that prices of shoes have come down. We still need a month or so to assess how goods coming from abroad will be priced and what percentage of tax will be applicable on them," Karmakar addedShoes priced below Rs 500 have come down (from 14.4 percent pre-GST to five per cent post-GST) but those above the figure have shot up from 14.4 per cent pre-GST to 18 per cent after the imposition of the 'one country, one tax' regime.
With total outstanding debt and contingent liabilities of over Rs 2 lakh Crore, cash-strapped Punjab government is hoping to turn the crunch around with the help of increased revenues following introduction of the Goods and Services Tax (GST). State finance minister, Manpreet Singh Badal, said as Punjab's revenue will grow at a guaranteed rate of 14 per cent for next five years, state's revenues will double during the period. "GST will bring an advantage to the state by bringing at par with other states in terms of tax imposition. Industries have not been coming to Punjab, partly because of the taxes, which are the highest in the state. Moreover, Punjab is a consumption-based state and GST will benefit us," Badal told The Statesman. "The Union government has also assured to provide compensation in case of any revenue loss. The GST regime will be helpful in an increase in our revenue by 14 per cent in next five years. Therefore, I hope the GST will help improving the state's fiscal health," he added. As of 31 March 2017, the total outstanding debt of the state was Rs 1,86,618 Crore including the informal debt of Rs 4,435 Crore which has been raised by the state government through various agencies without the approval of the Union government. The total outstanding debt and contingent liabilities, thus, come to Rs 2,07,226 Crore which is 403.38 per cent of revenue receipts for 2016-17 at Rs 51,371.79 Crore. The debt servicing (principal + interest) for 2017-18 is a whopping Rs 22,396 Crore against a net borrowing limit of Rs 12,819 Crore approved by the Union government for financial year 2017-18. Thus the state can not invest the borrowed money into the development and build resource generating Capital assets. "With GST, our (Punjab) tax revenues are likely to double in next five years. That's why I am looking at GST with great hope and Punjab as a state is fully prepared for it," Badal said. The state government hopes to gain from the introduction of GST through a broadened tax base and improved compliance. 
Expressing concern that the revolutionary Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime adopted by India will adversely impact trade and transit between Kathmandu and New Delhi, land-locked Nepal — majorly dependent on bilateral trade with India — has sought guarantees that the new tax system does not impinge upon existing treaties and accords in this regard. The Nepali Commerce Ministry said on Monday that it has written to India through the diplomatic channel urging that the GST regime should not impinge upon trade and transit treaties between the two countries. "Considering the possible impact on Nepal's trade with India following the implementation of the GST, we wrote to the Indian authorities to ensure that the new tax system should not infringe on bilateral trade," Rabi Shankar Sainju, Joint Secretary at Nepal's Ministry of Commerce, told Xinhua news agency. The introduction of the pan-India GST regime from July 1 has given rise to apprehensions here that Nepal's exports to India could henceforth attract higher taxes. "After sending the first letter about two months ago, we have also sent another reminder letter about three weeks ago," Sainju said. Nepal government officials said their economy was bound to be affected by India's new tax system as two-thirds of Nepal's international trade takes place with India alone.
The tourism industry in Himachal Pradesh as well as the visitors seem to be at the receiving end after the implementation of Goods and Services Tax (GST) roll out by Prime Minister Narendra Modi led NDA government on 1 July. The lack of clarity on taxes to be levied on services and the variation in the rate of taxes, ranging from dhabas to small and medium to high-end hotels, has left them all confused and dissatisfied. “There has been varied rate of taxes on hotel bookings as well as services rendered to the guests in small and big business establishments in the tourism sector,” Sanjay Sood, the president of Hotel and Restaurants Association, north India told The Statesman. The rate of GST at dhabas for small and medium to high-end hotels vary from 5 per cent to 18 per cent which is creating confusion among tourists. “The tourists are a harried lot as the cost of eatable items as well other services is different at these places, making them feel cheated,” Sood said. He said it was difficult to explain to them the difference as the taxes on various services related to tourism sector are not publicised in a better way. This is leading to confusion among hoteliers and tourists as dissatisfied customer means less business in future as the industry in the state is flourishing on word of mouth. “But such incidents would only make things worse for all,” he said. HP Tourism Development Corporation (HPTDC) chairman Harish Janartha also shared the concern of the hoteliers. “The GST rollout would have serious impact on tourism sector in the state,” Janartha told The Statesman, adding we will have to wait for 2-3 months to access the impact of GST on tourism activities in the state. So far, the HPTDC run hotels are witnessing 70-80 per cent occupancy rate, however, the occupancy rate at this point of time is high due to advance bookings made by the visitors. “The GST would affect high-end hotels in Himachal Pradesh as they attract a high rate of taxes while the small hotels would continue to receive tourists, owing low rate of taxes,” he said. It is worthwhile to mention here that HP witnesses inflow of over 2 Crore tourists and there have been consistent increase in visitors arrival in last one decade. The number of tourists visiting the state included the religious tourists who throng the famous temples and shrines round the year.
Amid retailers still holding old inventory at pre-GST price, the Central government on Tuesday allowed them to sell “unsold stock” at new prices after putting a sticker of the revised maximum retail price (MRP) along with the existing price on the packages of products. Addressing a joint press conference on the GST with Revenue Secretary Hasmukh Adhia, Consumer Affairs Secretary Avinash Srivastava said that the government has given a three month window till 30 September to companies to sell unsold stocks at new prices. This has been done as the GST rollout affected prices of commodities that were lying in godowns. "A revision in the rate of a pre-packaged commodity can be done only after advertisement in at least two newspapers," Srivastava said. Declaration of changed MRP can be done by way of stamping or putting sticker or online printing, he added. "In exercise of the powers conferred by rule 33 (1) of the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, the Central government hereby permits the manufacturers or packers or importers of pre-packaged commodities to declare the changed retail sale price (MRP) on the unsold stock manufactured/ packed/imported prior to 1st July, 2017 after inclusion of the increased amount of tax due to GST if any, in addition to the existing retail sale price (MRP), for three months w.e.f. from 1st July 2017 to 30th September , 2017," the Consumer Affairs Ministry said in a statement. Concerned about the rise in prices of various commodities after the GST rollout on 1 July,Revenue Secretary Adhia said the government was closely monitoring price and supply of goods, particularly essential and daily-use commodities, to ensure there are no disruptions post the GST rollout. He said there have been no reports of any disruptions post GST's implementation and that a central monitoring committee, comprising of 15 top Secretaries of the central government, will meet every Tuesday to take stock of the situation. Additionally, 175 officers of joint secretary/additional secretary level have been given charge of 4-5 districts each to monitor the GST implementation, he said. However, even post the GST rollout, the state governments would continue to hold their rights on imposing local taxes and various fees for heir state revenues. Adhia said toll, mandi charges and fee on vehicle entry into states are not subsumed in the GST and will continue to be charged by local bodies or state governments. All other levies on entry of goods have been subsumed in the GST, thereby resulting in abolition of entry barriers in 22 states. On the issue of registration for the GST, he said about two lakh new registrations have been done since the registration reopened last week. Of these, 39,000 have already been approved.
The grand midnight launch of GST by Prime Minister Narendra Modi has come at a cost of Rs.5 crore to the exchequer, according to political sources.This is the price of the one-month long facelift to the historic Central Hall of Parliament to dress it up for Modi’s showpiece function. Much to the chagrin of Central Hall regulars, the circular hall under the central dome of Parliament was shut for a full month for refurbishing.Central Hall is a popular adda for politicos and journalists alike. But they were forced to make do without while it was being readied for the GST launch. Portraits and paintings hanging on its walls have been spruced up and cleaned, the carpet has been replaced, the wooden tables have been repolished and buffed, the upholstery on the benches has been redone, etc.The aim was to restore a sparkle to the hall as if to push back the clock to the midnight of August 14-15, 1947, when India became independent and leaders of free India met for a historic session to mark the occasion. The choice of Central Hall as the venue for the launch of the path-breaking tax reform was carefully thought out by Modi who has a flair for theatrical flourishes high on symbolism.Jawaharlal Nehru gave a clarion call for nationalism through his famous tryst with destiny speech in this very hall.Modi has tried to recreate a similar fervor and give GST a nationalist veneer with the slogan one nation, one tax. The move is part of an attempt to address the protests against this controversial tax reform, most of which have come from his saffron associates.Leading affiliates of the RSS like the VHP, Swadeshi Jagran Manch, the Bharatiya Kisan Sangh and the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh have opposed GST and demanded that it be scrapped or at least put on hold till there is more clarity on the new tax structure.The strongest opposition to GST has come from the VHP which dubbed it “jizya kar” at its recent meet in Gujarat.The formulation is astounding because jizya is associated with Aurangzeb. This Mughal emperor hated by Sangh circles had reintroduced this tax on non-Muslims when he assumed power. Jizya was first imposed on non-Muslims by Qutbuddin Aibak but abolished by Akbar.Sangh circles believe Aurangzeb brought it back to harass the Hindus and squeeze money out of them. Given the anti-Hindu association of jizya, the VHP has obviously decided to up the ante against the Modi government by likening GST to this dreaded tax. Sangh circles say this is by far the strongest criticism of the Modi government by a Sangh affiliate.It raises questions on what the VHP is up to. Remember VHP is headed by staunch Modi critic Praveen Togadia. Interestingly, the VHP added a dramatic touch to its anti-GST stand by getting international general secretary Champatrai to pen a letter to the PM direct from the dais at the meeting.In the letter, Champatrai is believed to have protested that items related to Hindu prayers and rituals, like samagri, prasad, etc have all been brought under the GST net. He said this is a body blow to Hindus and called for immediate withdrawal of the tax.Last Iftar.President Pranab Mukherjee’s last Iftar at Rashtrapati Bhavan was a gloomy affair because of the boycott by the Modi government and the BJP. Although Modi himself never attended the Iftar, Rajnath Singh would always turn up as would minister for minority affairs Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi and a general secretary of the BJP. But this year, even these regulars gave the Iftar a miss without assigning any reason for their absence.The missing BJP presence was obviously the main topic of conversation at the Iftar. Most opposition leaders felt upset and hurt on the President’s behalf especially because it was his last Iftar before he demits office next month.In fact, the joke that went around was that this was probably the last Iftar Rashtrapati Bhavan would see because the next President represents Hindu nationalist forces who do not believe in holding Iftar gatherings.For instance, although former prime minister Atal Behari Vajpayee held an Iftar every year when he was in office, Modi has dispensed with the practice.So have all BJP governors in the states. Opposition leaders felt that the decision to stay away from Mukherjee’s Iftar was a snub to the outgoing President.If Mukherjee was upset, he did not show it. His face was stoically impassive as he went about his duties as a host. He was the impeccable President.Missing stop.One stop missing from Modi’s US itinerary was Capitol Hill, home to the US Congress. Considering a new government has assumed office in Washington and the complexion of the legislature has undergone a radical change with the Republicans in charge, diplomatic observers are surprised that Modi did not drop by Capitol Hill.They expected that the PM would meet with select new Congressmen and Senators and members of the India caucus as part of his gettingto-know-you mission to Trump’s USA. Although official circles tried to portray the visit as a low-key one without the usual flourishes, the fact is that Modi did meet with American business leaders. So why not meet with American politicians?One explanation going around is that Modi’s aides did not want him to face embarrassing questions about recent controversies like beef lynchings and the human shield episode in Kashmir. They have not forgotten that the human shield issue was raised by Democrat leader Nancy Pelosi when she visited India in May as part of a US Congressional delegation.Even an India-friendly Congressman like Ed Royce is reported to have expressed concerned to Indian interlocutors about vigilante killings in the name of the cow. Royce also happens to be the chairman of the House foreign relations committee.Diplomatic circles here say that he would have definitely been among those to meet Modi on Capitol Hill and could well have raised the topic with the PM.