Businesses remained shut here in Jammu and Kashmir on Wednesday as traders and civil society members called for an anti-GST shutdown. The protest shutdown was called against the Goods and Services Tax implementation by the JKCC. The Jammu and Kashmir Coordination Committee is a conglomerate of traders bodies and civil society members in the Valley. Independent MLA, Engineer Rashid, who took out an anti-GST march here, was intercepted by the police in Jahangir Chowk area. They took Rashid and some of his supporters into preventive custody. Authorities also imposed restrictions in five police station areas of Rainawari, Khanyar, Nowhatta, M.R.Gunj and Safa Kadal in the old city area to maintain law and order. Shops and other businesses also remained closed in areas where restrictions were not imposed.Public and private transport, however, moved almost normally in the uptown city areas. The state legislature is presently holding a special session to pass a resolution seeking implementation of the GST like in the rest of the country. State Finance Minister Haseeb Drabu moved the resolution in the lower House on Tuesday while state Roads and Buildings Minister Naeem Akhtar moved it in the upper House of the bicameral legislature.
It is known as the world's largest community kitchen — feeding freshly cooked food to an estimated 50,000 devotees on weekdays and over 100,000 on weekends and festivals. But the newly-introduced GST is going to put an extra burden of over Rs.10 crore on this socio-religious activity at the Golden Temple complex in Amritsar and other gurdwaras, temple officials say. With purchases made for the community kitchen coming under various slabs of the new GST, the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC), the mini-parliament of the Sikh religion that manages Sikh shrines (gurdwaras) in Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh, including the Harmandir Sahib (popularly known as the Golden Temple), is expecting an additional burden of Rs.10 crore from this year. Besides the Golden Temple, the SGPC runs the langar services in other famous Sikh shrines like Takht Keshgarh Sahib in Anandpur Sahib (where the modern day Khalsa Panth was established on April 13, 1699, by Guru Gobind Singh), Takht Damdama Sahib at Talwandi Sabo in Bathinda district and scores of other gurdwaras under it. The "Langar Sewa" (community kitchen) is a socio-religious activity that is part of the Sikh religious ethos from the time of the first Sikh Guru, Nanak Dev (1469-1539). The langar was started to emphasise equality in society regardless of religion, caste, colour and creed. With the new GST slabs likely to hit the SGPC 's purchases with an additional financial burden, Union Food Processing Minister Harsimrat Kaur Badal has written to Finance Minister Arun Jaitely to exempt all purchases made by SGPC for "langar sewa" from the GST Act. "The Punjab government had earlier exempted all items purchased for langar by SGPC at Sri Darbar Sahib Amritsar, Sri Keshgarh Sahib Anandpur and Talwandi Sabo Bathinda from VAT. The SGPC spends around Rs.75 crore to purchase desi ghee, sugar and pulses. Now, it will have to bear a financial burden of Rs.10 crore on these purchases as they come under the 5 to 18 per cent GST bracket," Badal pointed out. SGPC president Kirpal Singh Badungar has also sent a communication to the GST Council, which decides on the tax structure and exemptions, to exempt the Sikh body from the GST slabs. "Sri Harmandir Sahib runs the world's largest mega kitchen, offering free meals throughout the year to hundreds of thousands of people. (It is funded by) offerings made by people," Badal pointed out. "The central government should immediately withdraw the GST on purchases made by the SGPC and other religious institutions that are doing community service of this magnitude," Prithipal Singh, a devout Sikh who has been doing voluntary service at the Langar Hall of the Golden Temple complex in Amritsar for the past nearly a decade, told IANS. Under the new GST Act, there is provision for exemption to institutions/businesses on the recommendation of the GST Council. Hundreds of people volunteer on a daily basis at the Golden Temple complex and other gurdwaras to prepare and serve food and wash used utensils at the langars. The volunteers include scores of women and children as well. People partake langar while sitting on the floor in the langar halls of gurdwaras. The langar service is funded from donations made by people at gurdwaras. The SGPC has an annual budget of over Rs 1,100 crore to manage the gurdwaras under it. "Anyone coming to the langar is offered food. No one is ever turned back. It is part of the Sikh ethos," volunteer Gagandeep Singh pointed out. Hundreds of tonnes of wheat flour, desi ghee, pulses, vegetables, milk, sugar and rice are used, along with millions of litres of water, annually at the Golden Temple complex and other gurdwaras to prepare langar. The langar is completely vegetarian.
Industry is expected to contribute $280 billion to India's GDP in eight to nine years due to a positive fallout of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) as structural changes in the ease of doing business will propel growth, a study said on Wednesday. The study was done by ASSOCHAM-Ashvin Parekh Advisory Services. The Mumbai-headquartered body is a global management consulting firm with footprint in India and the UK. Describing the GST, in the short-term, as a "mini budget short of projection of estimated revenue", the paper said most businesses would be able to get significantly more credits under the new indirect tax regime, leading to a benefit for most of them. "It will bring a systematic approach and enhance transparency which will aid growth of business and would help the industry to concentrate on its core business," the paper said. "We believe that GST is a structural reform and is expected to accelerate the pace of GDP growth in India, despite implementation challenges in the near term. It would usher in lower taxes, seamless input tax credit, logistics savings and market share swings from unorganized to organised players," the paper added. One of the most visible benefits accruing immediately from GST is removal of the octroi at the checkposts at the inter-state borders, the most irritating and efficiency killing phenomenon that should have gone long ago, said ASSOCHAM Secretary General DS Rawat. "In any case, with most states removing the major trade obstacle immediately after the rollout of the GST, the ease of doing business would go up significantly and the operational efficiency would improve singularly from the removal of the border checkposts," he added. The paper said that notwithstanding the teething troubles, the GST would make even the micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) more efficient and confident, integrating them well into the mainstream of the economy. "Eventually, GST will turn these MSMEs more competitive with a level playing field between large enterprises and them. Furthermore, the Indian MSMEs would be able to compete with foreign competition coming from cheap cost centres such as China, the Philippines and Bangladesh"
The five per cent Goods and Services Tax (GST) rate will apply only on those branded cereals which are registered with the Register of Trade Marks, while others will remain exempted, the Finance Ministry said on Wednesday. The government clarification comes as doubts were being raised over the meaning of "registered brand name". "GST rate of five per cent will not be applicable on the supply of goods unless the brand name or trade name is actually on the Register of Trade Marks and is in force under the Trade Marks Act, 1999," the Ministry said here in a statement. "The Central GST (CGST) rate on supply of certain goods, such as 'chena' or 'paneer', natural honey, wheat, rice and other cereals, pulses, flour of cereals and pulses, other than those put up in unit container and bearing a registered brand name, is nil. "Supply of such goods, when put up in unit container and bearing a registered brand name attracts 2.5 per cent CGST rate," it said.
The government has increased the number of consumer helplines on GST from 14 to 60, with specially trained professionals handling queries related to the new indirect tax regime. “The government wants that the benefits of decreased prices, after the imposition of the GST, should reach the common man. For this we have increased the number of consumer helplines to 60,” Food and Consumer Affairs Minister Ram Vilas Paswan told reporters here. Earlier, there were 14 national consumer helplines, he said, adding that now professionals have been trained specifically to address the concerns of consumers related to the Goods and Service Tax (GST). The contact number of the national consumer helpline is 14404. Paswan said the government will take legal action against vendors not declaring revised MRP after the GST. An official notification was issued by the government saying that the packaging material or wrapper not exhausted prior to July 1 may be used for packing of material till September 30, 2017. This will be permissible after the manufacturer or importer or packer makes correction in the retail sale price on account of the GST implementation, by way of stamping or putting a sticker or online printing. The government has also introduced an anti-profiteering provisions that mandates companies, which benefit from lower indirect taxes, must pass on the benefits to consumers in terms of lower prices. The GST, introduced from July 1, replaces a thicket of indirect central and state levies.
The Himachal Pradesh government on Wednesday directed all fair price shop holders to register themselves under Goods and Services Tax (GST).Informing about the decision, Additional Chief Secretary, Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs Tarun Kapur said it would be mandatory for these shop holders to register themselves so that they could avail benefit of input tax credit on goods purchased from the Corporation. “They will have to file monthly return based on the sale on the same,” he said, adding the unregistered shopkeepers would not be able to get the benefit of the input tax credit.He said the detailed information had been made available on the website www.gst.gov.in. Kapur said the provisions under GST have been incorporated in the computer data base of the Corporation so that nobody faces any difficulty in selling goods under Public Distribution System.In yet another decision, the department has made digital ration cards mandatory to avail ration under Public Distribution System (PDS).“The digital ration cards were being distributed through fair price shops but some consumers had not collected their ration cards,” he said, adding such consumers has been requested to collect their cards from the depot holders as foodgrains would be distributed through these cards only in future.