With the advent of GST and RERA, developers would now have to adopt higher standards of performance compelling them to invest in project management, say experts. The government enacted the Real Estate (Regulation & Development) Act 2016 and all the sections of the Act have come into force with effect from May 1, this year, while the Goods and Services Tax came into effect from July 1. The GST and the RERA are touted as game changers converting unorganised real estate into an organised sector. “While the advent of RERA is being heralded as a game-changer and a great enabler in the long run, it may cause inconvenience in the short term. This is where project management will help the stakeholders,” CBRE South Asia Managing Director, Project Management Group Gurjot Bhatia told PTI here. A project manager's role is to ensure that the project stays on course based on the initially planned budget, schedule and vision, said SILA Founder and Managing Director Sahil Vora. “Post RERA, the roles played by a project manager have become mandatory on the developer, as he needs to deliver what was initially planned. “GST ensures that developers only use organised vendors and suppliers, in order to get the input tax credit, which will also improve the efficiency in delivering projects,” he said.
Over a week after the implementation of Goods and Services Tax (GST), uncertainty prevails over the movement of trucks under the new tax regime. As per the information with the truck unions in Chandigarh and surrounding areas, in some states border checkpoints for trucks have been removed for the incoming trucks, but the same are continuing in some states as was the case before the GST implementation from 1 July. The incharge of National Transport Operater Union, Sector-26 Chandigarh, Arajinder Singh, said truckers are facing difficulties as their work has come to a halt in these initial days of the GST tax regime. He added that they are uncertain about the GST regime and many trucks have stopped the transportation of goods for the time being. Another member of Truck Union, Punjab, Kulwant Singh said there is little impact on the movement of trucks post GST, as the barriers and the long queues for trucks continue as before. "There is no clear idea about the rate of GST to be charged. But once everything aligns, it would become easy," he hoped. The secretary, Dera Bassi Truck Union, Jaswant Singh, said the union used to send around 200- 300 trucks a day, but now the number has gone down to 20. The trucks entering Punjab have also dropped out in number. "Slowly the number is expected to increase in the coming 60 or more days,'' he said. 'Transporters are being asked to register themselves and to get the GST number for which we have applied but didn't get any further information and also there is confusion among the traders after the implementation of GST. "Business has gone down and many trucks haven't returned to their respective places since then,'' said Jagtar Singh, incharge of Satguru Loading Jeep Operator Union, Zirakpur. In 22 states, the border checkpoints are already abolished, including Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Bihar, Telangana, Arunachal Pradesh and many more.
Union Minister Jitendra Singh on Sunday said the GST system has a special significance for Jammu and Kashmir and the north-eastern states as it promises to provide a level playing field to all."The Goods and Services Tax promises to provide a level playing field to all the states. This equitable fair deal has been worked out to such an extent that several developed and manufacturing states will be contributing to the economy of the lesser developed or predominantly consumer states," the Minister of State in the Prime Minister's Office told media persons here.He said that, ahead of the GST rollout from July 1, he realised there were certain local products in the north-east which would be taxable after GST implementation, though these were tax-free earlier. "It was explained to traders concerned that earlier the price of these products also included certain embedded taxes on raw material, which were not visible, but now the only difference was that the GST was a visible tax, although the final cost of the product would almost be the same," he said.The Minister said the GST decision had made a huge long-lasting impact on self-esteem and participation of the states in the economic and social growth of India as a whole. He said he gave full credit to Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley for working out an amicable formula wherein the manufacturing states would be compensated from the central share of funds and thus would not have the chance to hold any grudge against non-manufacturing states being brought at par with them."The GST is important in the world today. No single country or state can hope to operate in isolation and yet progress economically," he said.