The government has exempted the import of aircraft, aircraft engines and its parts procured on lease from the purview of the Goods and Services Tax (GST). The aviation industry had been asking for relief as it was facing a dual levy of 5 per cent at the time of import and another 5 per cent at the time of payment of lease rent. Its concerns were raised by the civil aviation ministry before the revenue department on several occasions. The finance ministry in a notification yesterday said that airlines would not have to pay GST on import of aircraft and its parts if GST was paid on their lease. Airlines are awaiting a formal clarification on several other areas of concerns such as input tax credit not being available for economy class tickets and the movement of spares from one part of the country to another. 
Concerned about the apprehended impact on Nepal's commercial and trading activity due to the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) in India, a high-level government delegation from Nepal will be holding talks with Indian government officials in New Delhi on Tuesday. A 15-20 member team, led by Ravi Shankar Sainju, Joint Secretary in the Commerce Ministry, will be visiting India to discuss the new tax system in relation to the bilateral Trade and Transit Treaty between the two countries, the Kathmandu Post reported. The delegation will also include officials from the ministries of Foreign Affairs and Finance. "Although we are yet to see the actual impact of the GST recently imposed by India, the (Nepal) government has targeted to address the problems that the traders are reported to have been facing following the GST implementation," Sainju said. According to the bilateral treaty governing trade and transit, "Goods intended for import into or export from the territories of either Contracting Party from or to a third country shall be accorded freedom of transit through the territories of the other party". "No distinction shall be made which is based on the flag of vessels, the place of origin, departure, entry and exit destination or ownership of goods. Despite this provision in the treaty, traders and freight forwarders have been complaining about a slowdown in export and import of goods to and from third countries via India during last week in the wake of the Indian government enforcing GST, the report said. According to Nepali traders and freight forwarders, authorities at Kolkata Port earlier used to impose 15 per cent logistic service charge on goods imported from third countries. With the GST coming into effect, that charge has been raised to 18 per cent. "Although the GST should not affect Nepal's trade, with the confusion among the officials at the implementation level, Nepali traders could have been facing problems," said Sainju, adding that the ministry will finalise on Monday the main issues to be discussed in the meeting with Indian officials.
Chicken appears to have bowed out from the dining tables in Kerala with chicken sellers up in arms against Kerala Finance Minister Thomas Issac who has demanded that they sell the meat at Rs.87 a kg under the GST. Across the state, from Monday onwards chicken sellers have begun an indefinite strike saying that it is not possible to sell it at Rs.87 a kilogram. Issac had tried to cool down things down, but failed to prevent the strike after talks broke down on Sunday. Speaking to the media on Monday, Issac accused the big chicken companies outside the state of controlling things. "Prior to GST chicken meat had a tax of 14.5 per cent, and from July 1 that's no longer there, so it is only natural that the consumer should get the benefit. At least one portion of the tax gain should be passed to the consumer. The state-owned KEPCO is selling at Rs 120 a kilogram, as their product is cleaned, skinned and all the waste is removed," said Issac. The strike has led to another problem as chicken farmers would be left with full-grown chicken with no buyers. To counter that, many chicken farmers since Sunday have been moving their chicken to Tamil Nadu. To this, Issac said that just as products come into Kerala, they are free to send it out of the state as well. The poultry industry has been demanding that they are given time till September so that they can streamline their operations for GST, but that was shot down by Issac. On Friday, Issac had warned that action would be taken if chicken prices are not brought down as chicken had fallen under the zero tax bracket under the GST that rolledout on July 1. Issac had said that till June 30 Kerala was the only state in the country that levied a tax on chicken — under the 14.5 per cent tax bracket.
