Measured against its stated objectives, the newly introduced indirect tax regime – Goods and Services Tax (GST) – is a partial success, investment banking firm Jefferies said here on Thursday. "It succeeds in creating a unified market and increasing compliance, thereby boosting government revenues, and partially establishes a level playing field between different kinds of firms. However, GST in its current form fails to harmonise tax rates across products or enhance ease of doing business significantly," a report by the investment banking firm stated. It said GST's coverage of taxes to be subsumed is only 54 per cent. "However, the exclusion of petroleum products and electricity are particularly problematic. Diesel accounted for 12 per cent of total indirect tax collections. On an average, indirect taxes paid on diesel account for 30 per cent of logistics cost, for which no credit will be available to the consumer. The resulting cascading is significant in case of basic food items and most dry bulk commodities. "The report stated that it is sceptical of the government indication that petroleum products will also come under the GST ambit soon. Elaborating about the single market approach of the GST, the report said in the earlier system, tax on an item was a function of where it is sold as well as where it is produced. This obviously was a major hindrance to free movement of goods across the country. "GST succeeds in creating a single market across the nation – that is, the tax on a particular product would be the same across the country. However, GST fails to harmonise tax rates across products and services, and inherits the problem of multiple and rather confusing tax rates open to lobbying and abuse. "Talking about higher compliance and government revenues, the report stated GST, despite its shortfalls, is designed to rapidly increase compliance. "The architecture ensures constant and seamless exchange of information between various tax departments (customs, excise & service, state value added tax, income tax). It is no longer possible to be compliant to one department and not with another, or be compliant in one state and not in another. ""GST network would be able to calculate the user's gross profit that can and will be shared with the income tax department. The need to match tax credits on an invoice level defeats the possibility of fraudulent tax credits and back-dating of invoices. Tax liabilities would be far easier to calculate," the report added.
The government has set up a new wing to provide intelligence inputs and do big data analytics for taxmen for better policy formulation and taking action against tax evaders. The Directorate General of Analytics and Risk Management (DGARM) will be under the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC), mainly to use internal and external sources for detailed data mining to generate actionable inputs, the revenue department said in an office memorandum. The DGARM, which was set up on July 1 coinciding with the rollout of the Goods and Services Tax (GST), has four verticals headed by an official of rank of additional director general (ADG) or principal ADG. It will function as an apex body of CBEC for data analytics and risk management and will report to the chairman, CBEC. Incidentally, the CBEC is to be renamed as the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) after excise duty along with service tax and a dozen other central and state levies were subsumed into GST. “The data analytics and processing coupled with intelligence inputs would inter-alia provide the CBEC the national and sub-national perspective for policy formulation. The field formations of CBEC are also expected to gainfully and effectively utilise the data and other inputs shared by the DGARM,” the memorandum said. As part of the DGARM, a National Targeting Centre has been set up, which is responsible for application of a nationally coordinated approach to risk analysis and targeting of risky goods and passengers crossing the borders of the country. “It shall provide 247 operational risk interdiction supports to field formations of the CBIC,” it said. The centre in question will institutionalise coordination with other government departments and other stakeholders for sharing databases, information, intelligence and reports to build risk profile of entities. Also, a 'Centre for Business Intelligence and Analytics' (CBIA) has been set up that will be responsible for identification of information requirements of the CBEC. It will utilise data feeds from internal sources. The CBIA shall be responsible for providing analytical inputs to support identification, targeting and risk management functions of the National Targeting Centre, the Risk Management Centre for Goods and Services Tax and the Risk Management Centre for Customs. The third vertical of the DGARM is the 'Risk Management Centre for Goods and Services Tax' which will institutionalise mechanism to collect necessary inputs, adopt coordinated approach and share the outcome for risk-based identification for the purpose of scrutiny, audit and enforcement functions. Besides, the 'Risk Management Centre for Customs' will be responsible for assessment and targeting of risky cargo crossing the borders through sea, air and land. The DGARM will do detailed data mining and analysis to generate outputs for focused and targeted action by field formations and investigation wings of the CBEC. It will, in conjunction with DG Systems, organise, evaluate and interpret data for effective, efficient and targeted policy formulation and revenue administration, the memorandum stated. Through these four verticals, the DGARM will work in close coordination with the Directorate General of Systems and the Data Management Directorate General of Revenue Intelligence, the Directorate General of Goods and Services Tax Intelligence, the Directorate General of Audit and Directorate General of Valuation.
Services provided by housing societies across the country will not become expensive under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) system, the government said on Thursday. "There are some press reports that services provided by a Residents Welfare Association (RWA) will become expensive under the GST. These are completely unsubstantiated," a Finance Ministry statement here said. A RWA shall be required to pay GST on monthly subscription/contribution charged from its members if such subscription is more than Rs.5,000 per member and the annual turnover of RWA by way of supply of services and goods is also Rs 20 lakh or more. "Under the GST, the tax burden on RWAs will be lower for the simple reason that they will now be entitled to ITC (Input Tax Credit) in respect of taxes paid by them on capital goods (generators, water pumps, lawn furniture), goods (taps, pipes, and other sanitary/hardware fittings) and input services such as repairs and maintenance services," it said. The ITC on central excise and VAT paid on goods and capital goods was not available in the pre-GST period and these were a cost to the RWA. Thus, there is no change made to services provided by the housing society to its members in the GST era, the Ministry said. Supply of service by RWA (unincorporated body or a registered non-profit entity) to its own members by way of reimbursement of charges or share of contribution up to Rs 5,000 per month per member for providing services and goods for common use of its members in a housing society/residential complex are exempt from GST. Further, if the aggregate turnover of such RWA is up to Rs 20 lakh in a financial year, then such supplies would be exempted from GST even if charges per member are more than Rs 5,000, it said.
Refuting reports that hostel fee charged by educational institutions will attract 18 per cent Goods and Services Tax (GST), the Finance Ministry on Thursday said such services provided to students, faculty and staff are fully exempt under the new indirect tax regime. "There are some reports that GST at the rate of 18 per cent will be levied on annual subscription/ fee charged for lodging in hostels. This is not true. There is no change in tax liability relating to education and related services in the GST era, except reduction in tax rate on certain items of education," the ministry clarified in a statement. "It may be mentioned that services provided by an educational institution to students, faculty and staff are fully exempt," it said. Services of lodging/ boarding in hostels provided by such educational institutions which are providing pre-school education and education up to higher secondary school or equivalent or education leading to a qualification recognised by law, are fully exempt from the GST. "Annual subscription/ fees charged as lodging/ boarding charges by such educational institutions from its students for hostel accommodation shall not attract GST," the statement noted.
The Centre and state governments are likely to bring various petroleum products under the Goods and Services Tax regime in a phased manner. A senior government official said, "Though it may not be possible to bring all petroleum products together under GST, we are hopeful that the GST Council could look at it for phased inclusion." He added that natural gas can be first included under  GST. At present, petroleum products such as crude oil, diesel, petrol and natural gas are out of the ambit of GST. Hence, any input tax paid on the output of crude, gas, ATF and automotive fuel would not be entitled to receive any credit, thus increasing the tax burden. However,  products like cooking gas, kerosene and naphtha are included in GST. Oil exploration and refining and marketing companies have presented their concerns to the oil ministry citing a possible loss of more than Rs 25,000 crore annually if petroleum products are kept out of the GST net. Officials close to the development said since natural gas is an item that is mostly used in the industrial sector, there is a possibility of it being  included in GST as soon as possible. The official said though the inclusion of petroleum products is not on the agenda of the next GST Council meeting, it is likely that the Centre and States will discuss the issue. Market experts said since the Centre and states earns bulk of their revenues from these products they have considered keeping the five petroleum products out of GST's ambit, but it is not creating a uniform market and raises compliance issues. A back of the envelope calculation by an expert revealed that if petrol and diesel were brought under GST and at a higher tax rate of 28 per cent, the retail price of both will reduce by almost half. Both the Centre and states are not ready to forego the revenue stream, the expert said. 