The government on Saturday exhorted traders liable for registration under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime to do so at the earliest as July 30 is the last date, failing which would attract a penalty. "As per the GST laws, one is required to take registration on or before July 30. All traders are requested to register now without waiting for the last date," the Finance Ministry said in a statement. Traders carrying-out any business with an annual aggregate turnover in the preceding financial year exceeding Rs 20 lakh (Rs 10 lakh in special category states), need to register in all the states/union territories from where they are making taxable supplies. However, one need not register if exclusively engaged in the supply of exempted goods or services or both. If one is liable to take registration but does not get registered, he will not be able to take the input tax credit. Also, any registered person, purchasing from such a trader may not be able to get the input tax credit. "Not obtaining registration, though liable to do so, would also attract penalty," the statement said. To take the registration, a trader needs to file an online application on the portal https://www.gst.gov.in/ for which a valid PAN, email id and a mobile number is a must. Once these three details are verified, the trader will be required to furnish other details relating to the business. No physical documents need to be submitted unless a query is raised and documents are asked for. All necessary documents can be scanned and uploaded. The trader will receive his/her registration online within thee working days from submission of online application, it said. The government said that by getting registered a trader can help grow his business and also contribute to nation building. "Prospective buyers, who are registered under GST, will prefer to buy from suppliers who are also registered under GST, as this would entitle them to the input tax credit. This also means that one is contributing his bit towards nation building, by ensuring that appropriate taxes are collected and paid to the government," it said. The government on Saturday asked traders to get registered under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime by July 30. However, traders with turnover of below Rs.20 lakh or those engaged exclusively in the supply of exempted goods or services need not register under the new tax regime which has kicked in from July 1. "As per the GST laws, one is required to take registration on or before July 30, 2017. All traders are requested to register now without waiting for the last date," a finance ministry statement said. Listing the benefits of getting registered under GST, the ministry said that input tax credit can be passed on in the value chain and due taxes collected will come to the exchequer. "Therefore, traders are requested to register under GST immediately without wasting any more time," it said. Businesses with turnover of up to Rs.20 lakh (Rs.10 lakh in special category states) are exempt from GST. "If one is carrying out any business and has an annual aggregate turnover in the preceding financial year exceeding INR 20 lakh, you need to register in all the states/Union Territories from where you are making taxable supplies," it said. Excise, VAT or service tax payers who have already migrated to the GSTN portal and have been issued provisional IDs need to complete the registration process by September 22, 2017, by giving all the documents following which GSTIN will be issued. Those taxpayers who need not register under the GST regime can cancel their registration by July 22. Those who have not migrated but are liable for registration will have to do so by July 22, it added. For new taxpayers who are not registered under any of the erstwhile tax regimes, they will have to get themselves registered by July 30. If anytime during the course of the financial year a business crosses the INR 20 lakh turnover threshold, then it will have to apply for registration within 30 days from becoming liable for registration. The finance ministry said if a business has a valid PAN, email ID and a mobile number, then it can file an online application on the common portal https://www.gst.gov.in/ and get registered for GST. "Taking registration in GST is a very simple process, and the comfort of the taxpayer has been kept in mind while designing the procedure," the statement said. The ministry said that getting registered under GST is for one's own benefit and if one is liable to take registration but does not get registered, one will not be able to enjoy the benefit of input tax credit. Any registered person purchasing from him/her may not be able to get the input tax credit. Besides, not obtaining registration, though liable to do so, would also attract penalty, it added. "Getting registered would lead to growth in one s business. Prospective buyers, who are registered under GST, will prefer to buy from suppliers who are also registered under GST, as this would entitle them to the input tax credit," the ministry said. Getting registered would mean that one is contributing his bit towards nation building by ensuring that appropriate taxes are collected and paid to the government, it added. Earlier in the week, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had asked all chief secretaries to work expeditiously towards ensuring that all traders register under the GST regime. He conveyed this while chairing a meeting of Pro-Active Governance and Timely Implementation (PRAGATI), a multi-modal platform through which he interacts with top officials of state governments via tele-conferencing. 
The buying and selling of second hand goods will not attract Goods and Services Tax (GST) if sold at a price cheaper than the purchase price, the government said on Saturday. Rule 32(5) of the Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST) Rules, 2017, provides that where a taxable supply is provided by a person dealing in buying and selling of second hand goods or used goods as such or after such minor processing which does not change the nature of the goods and where no input tax credit has been availed on the purchase of such goods, the value of supply shall be the difference between the selling price and the purchase price and where the value of such supply is negative, it shall be ignored. This is known as the margin scheme. The clarification comes after doubts were raised regarding the applicability of the Margin Scheme under the GST for dealers in second hand goods in general and for dealers in old and used empty bottles in particular. "The value will be difference between selling and purchase price and where the value of such supply is negative it shall be ignored, provided there is no change in nature of goods and credit on purchased second hand goods is not availed by dealer. In case the value determined is negative, i.e. goods are sold at loss then tax will not be payable," GST expert Pritam Mahure told IANS. Thus, Margin Scheme can be availed of by any registered person dealing in buying and selling of second hand goods (including old and used empty bottles) and who satisfies the conditions as laid down in Rule 32(5) of the Central Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017. Rule 32(5) of the CGST Rules is a special sub-rule for person buying and selling second hand goods (for instance used cars, television and mobiles). Further, the government notification exempts Central Tax leviable on intra-state supplies of second hand goods received by a registered person dealing in buying and selling of second hand goods (who pays the central tax on the value of outward supply of such second hand goods) from any supplier, who is not registered. "This has been done to avoid double taxation on the outward supplies made by such registered person, since such person operating under the Margin Scheme cannot avail input tax credit on the purchase of second hand goods," the Finance Ministry said here in a statement. 
It is not only the small scale industries or the traders those are facing heat of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) implementation, in fact the Gram Panchayats (village councils) or the farmers earning over Rs 20 lakh annually by 'leasing out' the land will also have to pay the tax. Following the move, now the panchayats in Haryana are up in arms against bringing their revenue under the GST ambit. Talking to The Statesman, Haryana additional excise and taxation commissioner (ETC), legal, RBS Tewatia said that any individual or the organisation whose aggregate turnover exceeds the threshold limit of Rs 20 lakh, is required to register under the GST and the same is applicable on everybody. The official, however, said that there was a little possibility that there would be such farmers whose turnover by leasing out the land exceed the prescribed monetary limit, but certain gram panchayats might be there having income over Rs 20 lakh per year. In that case, they have to register under the GST and would have to pay 18 per cent of the total revenue collected by leasing out the panchayat land, Tewatia added. Sarpanch (head) of Munak village in Karnal, Hawa Singh Sharma, said this is totally unfair. "Our panchayat leases out nearly 200 acres and under the GST rules now, the panchayat has to pay over Rs 12 lakh per year, which a huge loss to the panchayat," he said. The head of another such village Panchayat, Kohad, in the district, which leases out around 200 acres of land, Sherpal said as several lakhs of rupees from the panchayat earnings would now go the government due to the GST, developmental works in the villages will be hit. The president of Block Gharaunda Sarpanches' Association, Pawan Singh, told The Statesman that bringing revenue of panchayats under the ambit of GST will be opposed. "This is not fair as the government claims to empower the Panchayati Raj Institutions. We will take up the issue with the local MLAs and others in the state government," he said. In Gharaunda Block of Karnal alone, there are many panchayats, which lease out over 100 acres of land annually and now they have to pay several lakh rupees as GST. As per the Department of Development and Panchayats, over 1.42 lakh acres of land is leased out by panchayats in Haryana every year, earning over Rs 200 Crore as revenue to the villages. Several of such panchayats will come under the ambit of GST if they exceed the turnover limit of Rs 20 lakh.
