New indirect tax regime GST is likely to be beneficial for auto, cement and organised retail sectors, but will have a negative impact on oil and gas, and SME sectors, Fitch Ratings said on Tuesday.

In contrast, the impact would be broadly neutral for property, electricity, telecom, pharmaceutical and fertiliser sectors, it said.

“The national service tax (GST), is unlikely to lead to rating changes for any of Fitch's internationally rated corporates despite being negative for certain sectors,” it said.

However, implementation risks will remain over the next 12 months due to the complexities of adopting the new system amid a culture of poor compliance, particularly among the traditional retail and SME sectors.

Implemented on 1 July, Goods and Services Tax (GST) replaces over 17 different taxes, including excise, service tax and VAT.

“A number of near-term challenges for the larger corporates are likely to persist until all trading counter parties are on the system and familiar with the different tax rates that will apply to their goods and services,” Fitch said.

Under the Indian GST regime, a corporate will only be able to apply GST input tax credits after its supplier of goods or services has first settled its GST payment with the government. This means that the burden of non-compliance by the supplier will rest with the purchaser and not the government, the US-based agency said.

“Accordingly, GST tax truancy by financially weak and non-compliant companies lower down the supply chain could limit the amount of input tax credits available for the larger and financially strong corporates,” Fitch said.
The steel ministry has expressed concerns that cost of steel manufacturing will increase as electricity, being one of the major inputs, has been kept out of the Goods and Service Tax.

The concerns were expressed at a recent meeting of the ministry with the Prime Minister's Office, a government official said.

“Electricity being a major input for steel industry will increase the cost of manufacturing if it remains out of the GST,” the official said.

The concerns were also expressed by the steel ministry during the meeting that the Clean Energy Cess of Rs 400 per tonne which was being charged pre GST remains effectively non-cenvatable in the new regime.

Natural gas, one of the inputs used in manufacturing sponge iron/Hot Briquetted Iron, an intermediate product used in steel making, has been kept out of GST purview. Under the previous regime, a partial was available, the official said.

“However, in the new regime, the tax paid on the natural gas is a cost and no input tax credit is available on the same,” the official added.

The steel ministry is also of view that royalty is charged on iron ore at 15 per cent of the base price and is yet not cenvatable.

Besides, Forest Development Fee (FDF) and similar charges like contribution in District Mineral Foundation and National Mineral Exploration Trust, which are in the nature of tax, need to be subsumed in GST, the official said.

The steel industry had earlier in the month said that with GST rollout the unorganised players in the sector will have to move to organised form of doing business.

GST – India's biggest tax reform since the Independence – was rolled out this month, unifying more than a dozen central and state levies.
