GST rates will not be revised unless there is an anomaly or the rates are unjustified, CBEC Chairperson Vanaja Sarna said on Wednesday.Her comments came in the wake of textile traders' demand of lowering five per cent GST on textiles.“It is an issue that has snowballed but it is not something which cannot be settled… The issue is that textile sector is taxed for the first time. So anybody who comes into the net would feel the pinch,” Sarna said at a CII event here.Yesterday, the traders in Surat called off their two- week-long strike against five per cent GST following the Centre's assurance to look into their demand of rollback.She further said: “Unless there is something not fully justified. ..unless there is an anomaly, I don't think there is a reason to look at any rates at the moment.”The Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) has received representations from textile traders and is looking into their demands, Sarna said.She said industry will have issues relating to GST rates, laws and rules and there is still time for industry to present its wish list as July one was not the end date.But, it would not be possible to meet the demand for GST rate reduction unless there is an anomaly, or there is a need for correction, or something has been left out.“July one doesn't close everything and the kind of fitment of commodities that has taken place is kind of doing five budgets in one,” she said.GST was rolled out on July one and has four tier tax slab of 5, 12, 18 and 28 per cent.Over 1,200 goods and 500 services have been fit into these tax slabs.
So far in Haryana, a total 2,07,838 dealers have successfully enrolled under the Goods and Service Tax (GST) migration and by July 31, 100 per cent dealers would be enrolled. This was revealed during the first meeting of Committee constituted to monitor the implementation of GST held on Wednesday.An official spokesperson said that for the migration of pending dealers, directions have been issued to Excise and Taxation Officers of all districts. Apart from this, 16,495 applications have been received for registration and 12,897 have been generated through GSTIN.He further stated that the GST registration of all government departments would start from July 25. The Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) of all departments have been directed to get themselves registered under GST.The state government has decided to depute Administrative Secretaries on duty to review the implementation of GST in all districts. Twelve sectoral groups have been formed for the implementation of GST which includes banking, financial services and insurance, telecom, information technology, information technology enabled services and e-commerce, travel, tourism, transport and logistics, textiles and handicrafts, auto sector and MSME, services, big infrastructure, drug, pharmaceuticals and food processing, mining, plywood and brick kiln owners (BKOs) and warehousing. Also, officers have been nominated for these sectoral groups, he added.The spokesperson further stated that in order to sensitise the stakeholders, GST awareness campaigns, refresher training on GST and GSTN modules and seminars were organised in all districts. Besides this, workshop was conducted for all government departments, boards and corporations and seminar was organised for cabinet ministers, MLAs, administrative secretaries and heads of departments.
Imposition of 18 per cent rate on pesticides under the Goods and Service Tax (GST) system has become a cause of worry not only for farmers but crop protection product manufacturers as well.Manufacturers say it will increase agricultural input costs, putting an additional burden on farmers as use of pesticides is essential owing to its role in controlling pest and increasing productivity. As the current farming season is at the sowing stage, actual impact cannot be measured right now, but it will definitely have negative impact, said Rajshekhar Sakhalkar, Director of CropLife India. CropLife India represents 14 Indian and multinational companies engaged in crop protection products."Before GST, the tax rate on pesticides was 14-15 per cent. We thought it would be between 5-12 per cent under the GST, but the government increased it to 18 per cent. It will add to input costs for farmers. The overall cost will then increase," Sakhalkar said.A rice-grower from Allahabad, Rajkumar Pathik, said he was aware of the possible hike in prices of pesticide."It is sowing season now. So we have not bought pesticides yet. But there are talks among farmers that pesticides will become costlier due to higher taxes," Pathik said. About the impact on the industry, Sakhalkar said: "We have to see how farmers behave towards such increase in prices. We will have to see how it overall works out for the pesticide industry. It will be interesting to see." Rajasthan's Agriculture Minister Prabhu Lal Saini said last week that he would speak to the central government to bring the GST rate down."We expect this issue to be raised at the national level, which may benefit us as well. Since it is a basic need of farmers, its prices have to be brought down. Whenever new things come, there is scope for improvement. We will try to bring the issue to the Centre's notice," Saini had said during an event here. Sakhalkar said the industry will also represent to the government.