FMCG major Hindustan Unilever (HUL) today said the new tax regime of goods and services tax (GST) has not impacted the consumer offtake and expects the price cuts undertaken by it to drive sales. "I don't think GST has impacted the consumer offtake. In fact, with us taking the lead in reducing the consumer price, it should give a fillip to consumer demand and consequently to the volume," HUL Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director Sanjiv Mehta said here. The company had reduced the prices of some of its detergents and soaps, extending the tax benefits it got under the GST regime to consumers. Mehta said most of the trade channels are returning to normalcy, barring a few wholesale traders in the central part of the country. "There are some channels like modern trade which have gone back to their normal rhythm, canteen store department, which had stopped buying a few weeks before the transition, they have started buying and they are slowly getting into the rhythm. There are sections of general trade in some parts of the country, which are limping back to normalcy," he said. The company's topline and volume growth were impacted by 200 basis points with the canteen store department not buying from it. "I think the most affected still remains the wholesale in the territory of central India like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, those are the cases where the traders are still sitting on the fence, waiting to understand what they need to do and how they need to react to the new era of GST," he said. "I would believe that sooner or later, the trade channel should start unclogging and there would be some element of channel reset but the large number of wholesalers who are engaged in trade, would have to find ways and means of engaging with the trade, accepting GST is a reality and they will have to live with that," he added.
Over 12 lakh businesses have applied for fresh registration under the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime, Revenue Secretary Hasmukh Adhia has said.Of these, while 10 lakh applications for registration have been approved, 2 lakh are still pending approval.“The figure of new registrations approved in GST crosses 10 lakhs today. About 2 lakh applications pending in process,” Revenue Secretary Hasmukh Adhia tweeted.Businesses have time till July 30 to register under the GST.Also during the course of the year, if a business becomes liable to register under GST, it needs to apply for registration within 30 days from becoming liable for it.Although businesses with turnover of up to Rs 20 lakh are exempt from GST and hence registration is not mandatory, traders and manufacturers are getting themselves registered so that the input tax credit can be passed on in the supply chain.When a business registers under GST, it is given a provisional GSTIN. After that, in the second stage, the business has to log in to the GSTN portal and furnish details of its business including the main place of business, additional place, directors and bank account details.