New Delhi: The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs has approved the revision in the price of ethanol under Ethanol Blended Petrol programme for supply to the PSU oil companies. The revised price of ethanol would be fixed at Rs 40.85 per litre under EBP and will be applicable for the forthcoming sugar season 2017-18. GST and transportation charges will also be payable additionally.
New Delhi: To make the process of filing returns simpler, GST Network on Wednesday launched an offline tool for filing purchase returns GSTR-2. The tool will allow taxpayers to export data of GSTR-2 to excel. This will be helpful in comparing this data with purchase register to take actions like accept, reject and modify, GSTN said.
Chandigarh: HDFC Bank has launched Smart Up Zone, an exclusive area inside the branch dedicated to startups, in Chandigarh. The bank plans to open similar zones in Amritsar, Jalandhar and Ludhiana. Through this zone, specially trained bank staff will offer tailor-made banking and advisory solutions to entrepreneurs.
Chandigarh: Land Rover has announced the launch of the 5th generation Discovery in India with prices starting from ?71.38 lakh. Available in two powertrain options, the 3.0 L Diesel 190 kW & 3.0 L Petrol 250 kW, the all-new Discovery is Land Rover’s most versatile SUV yet, with class leading practicality and capability.
New Delhi: The All India Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers (CPI-IW) for September remained stationary at 285. Retail inflation for industrial workers slid to 2.89% in September, from 4.14% in the same month last year, on account of cheaper food items.
New Delhi, November 1:  Business confidence weakest since February This is for the third consecutive month that the index has come in above 50 that separates expansion from contraction The decline in manufacturing activity was mostly because of stagnation in new business as negative impacts of GST led to subdued demand conditions Moreover, new export orders dropped at the fastest pace since September 2013 Business confidence eased to the weakest since February as some firms expressed concerns over negative GST effects Manufacturing activity in India slackened in October as new orders stagnated in the wake of subdued demand conditions, largely due to negative impacts of GST, a monthly survey said today. The Nikkei India Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) fell to 50.3 in October, from 51.2 in September, indicating a broad stagnation in the manufacturing sector. This is for the third consecutive month that the index has come in above 50 that separates expansion from contraction. The decline in manufacturing activity was mostly because of stagnation in new business as negative impact of GST led to subdued demand conditions. Moreover, new export orders dropped at the fastest pace since September 2013. India’s manufacturing companies struggled somewhat as the recent recovery enjoyed by the sector lost impetus in October, said Aashna Dodhia, Economist at IHS Markit and author of the report, adding that manufacturing production rose at the weakest pace in the current sequence of growth. Dodhia further noted that inflows of new orders stagnated as the negative effects arising from implementation of GST continued to dampen demand levels. Furthermore, overseas demand for Indian goods dipped to the greatest extent since September 2013. The silver lining, however, is firms added to their payroll numbers at a similar pace to that of September in response to greater volumes of outstanding business. On the price front, input cost pressures rose at the fastest pace since May. Subsequently, firms reportedly raised their output prices to pass on greater cost burden to clients and protect their profit margins. Meanwhile, the level of business confidence eased to the weakest since February. Business confidence eased to the weakest since February as some firms expressed concerns over negative GST effects. However, those manufacturers that were optimistic forecast benefits of GST materializing over the next 12 months, Dodhia added. The October manufacturing PMI data comes in sharp contrast to the robust show by India on World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business ranking. India jumped 30 notches to the 100th place in the latest compilation.
