New Delhi, November 4: The government today said investments worth Rs 68,000 crore have been committed by many domestic and multinational firms, including ITC, PepsiCo, Patanjali and Coca Cola Co, in India’s food and agriculture sector. The Ministry of Food Processing Industries said 13 MoUs were signed on the inaugural day of World Food India 2017 event here. We have already signed MoUs worth Rs 68,000 crore on the first day of World Food India and more investment is set to come over the next few days, Union Minister for Food Processing Harsimrat Kaur Badal said. While PepsiCo announced to invest Rs 13,300 crore for setting up a food and beverage plant, rival Coca Cola announced to bring in Rs 11,000 crore for juice bottling infrastructure and fruit processing plants and equipment. ITC and Patanjali also inked MoUs to invest Rs 10,000 crore each. Besides, Amazon, UAE’s Sharaf Group and Yes Bank are also among major investors, the statement added. These investments will help us realise the goal of doubling farmers’ income as well as generating massive employment in the food processing sector, Badal said. While conglomerate ITC said it would invest over Rs 10,000 crore to set up 20 integrated food processing and logistics facilities, PepsiCo reiterated that it along with its partners would invest Rs 13,000 crore in the next five years. Speaking at the inauguration of event, Nestle Chairman of Board of Director Paul Bulcke said top priority should be given to investment in building agriculture capacity amid challenges of scarce natural resources, rising population and growing food demand. Commenting on India’s potential in food and agri sector, ITC Ltd CEO and Executive Director Sanjiv Puri said, With a population of 1.3 billion, India’s consumption market is projected to triple to $4 trillion by 2025 with the bulk of expenditure going into food products. Unilever Global President Amanda Sourry said, The world is looking towards India. The opportunities for foods in India are huge. We at Unilever are excited at opportunities in India. She said rich agri-resources in India create an optimal opportunity to scale up the processing industry here. Hindustan Unilever Ltd CEO & Managing Director Sanjiv Mehta said: India is an attractive destination by any yardstick which you look at...We are talking about one of the most attractive market and as the economy grows, there would be more people coming and moving up. Metro AG COO and Metro Cash and Carry CEO Pieter Boone said the recent policy decisions to improve ease of doing business coupled with demonetisation and GST are now driving positive overhaul in the economic environment.  
Chandigarh, November 4: Thanks to confusion over the GST regime, small and medium businesses (SMBs) and traders are still reluctant to align with the GST filing companies, including providers of billing software, even after four months of its implementation. Though multiple GST software companies were set up for making businesses simpler under the GST regime through their billing software, however, these companies are facing challenges from businessmen with regard to the GST filing. Call it ignorance or a deliberate attempt to evade tax, many SMBs, including traders, are not willing to deploy GST billing software. The software makes the business operation transparent. But many businesses are reluctant to do billing online and are still relying on hand written bills said Rshmi Khetrapal, founder of Count Magic. Launched on June 16 this year, Delhi-based Count Magic said it was not getting the desired response from the SMBs. The company claims to be the first integrated cloud-based business and accounting platform in India, built to ease business operations under the GST regime. The company offers GST-ready billing platform, which enables SMEs, businesses, traders, distributors and educational institutes to shorten their processes of monthly GST filing to a single click. However, Rshmi apprehends since it is a new system, so maybe people will take time to align themselves with the new software. Echoing similar sentiments, Ashish Mittal, co-founder, EasemyGST, said, There are multiple reasons behind low rate of adoption. Firstly, it is ignorance as small traders are still having confusion about the prevailing system. Secondly, it is technology. Many of the SMBs are not well versed with technology i.e about billing software although it’s very easy to operate. And thirdly, it is a deliberate move to evade tax. They think by not adopting GST billing software, they can evade tax but it’s not so.Gurgaon-based EasemyGST is offering a comprehensive GST-compliant and ERP-integrated solution for businesses. Adding to these, companies are reluctant to work with the GST filing companies as they think the government might have a track record of their inventory, billing, GST filing etc. Consequently, these software billing companies in startup space are facing challenges from the SMBs. Another Delhi-based software company said despite organizing seminars and awareness workshops they had not got the desired response from the SMBs.
