Chandigarh, November 29: Already facing slowdown in the domestic and export market, the Rs 1,600-crore Jalandhar-based sports goods industry is facing issues pertaining to GST refund. The over five-month delay in GST refund has hit the working capital of manufacturers and outbound shipments. The manufacturers said around Rs 25-30 crore of input tax credit remains stuck and they were in a state of crisis. As per manufacturers, the GST on raw material varies from 8% to 28% on different types of raw materials. So, on an average, 12% GST on raw material is hurting the industry. The manufacturers lamented that VAT refund was not affecting the industry to that extent as it used to be 3-4% of the raw material cost. Our working capital is already blocked in the form of VAT refund for the past 2-3 years. Now, it’s GST refund which is pending for the past over five months. Since GST contributes significant portion of the raw material cost such as petrochemical products and foam etc., it’s affecting the industry. If the government doesn’t take action in a time-bound manner, it will be difficult for the industry to survive in the extremely competitive market,said Raghunath S Rana, managing director, Ranson Sports Industry. The manufacturers rued that the Centre had brought notification to give relief to exporters but as far as refund is concerned, the government was yet to take any concrete action. Facing paucity of funds, many manufacturers are now looking to meet their working capital requirements through private financing as they have already exhausted their bank limits. The finance through private institutions is a costly affair as the interest rates are 30-40% higher. We have export obligations to be honoured in time and left with no option but to approach the private lenders, said another exporter on condition of anonymity.
New Delhi, November 29: GST collection in October slipped to Rs 83,346 crore, from over Rs 92,000 crore last month, as taxes on most commodities have come down. The total collection of GST till November 27 is Rs 83,346 crore for October and 50.1 lakh returns have been filed for the month, a Finance Ministry statement said. The Centre has released a compensation of Rs 10,806 crore to states for July and August. A compensation of Rs 13,695 crore for September and October is being released, it added. The states’ revenues have been fully protected taking base year revenue as 2015-16 and providing a projected revenue growth rate of 14 per cent, the ministry said.
