Anti-profiteering actions by the government is acting as a pushback for genuine price hikes amid sustained raw material inflation, according to a 23 January note by brokerage Jefferies. Photo: Pradeep Gaur/MintMumbai: Most FMCG firms are reluctant to raise prices despite rising input costs, fearing the government may act against them under the goods and services tax’s (GST) anti-profiteering clause.The government had served notices to several packaged consumer goods companies under the anti-profiteering clause in the past month.“January 2018 should see complete benefit of revised prices as new lower priced products reach customers post GST revision,” brokerage Jefferies LLC said in a 23 January note to clients.“This, along with stable to mildly improving demand scenario, should support volumes. However, anti-profiteering actions by the government is acting as a pushback for genuine price hikes amidst sustained raw material inflation,” the note said.Prices of key raw materials for FMCG firms rose 15-90% as of January 2018, from a year earlier, according to data compiled by Jefferies.Crude oil has gained 17.7%; LAB or linear alkylbenzene (used to make detergents) has risen 15.4%; liquid paraffin (for hair oils) has advanced nearly 30%; and titanium dioxide (raw material used to make paints) on the Chinese market has gained 26%.Companies that are likely to be affected by the rise in prices of these raw materials include detergent-maker Hindustan Unilever Ltd, India’s largest household goods maker.Yet, apart from Procter & Gamble and Marico Ltd, no other major consumer goods companies have raised product prices significantly.A Hindustan Unilever spokesperson declined to comment. Marico and P&G are in the so-called quiet period before announcing quarterly results.Hindustan Unilever highlighted rising input costs in its December 2017 quarter results during its press briefing and analyst call held on 17 January. “Input costs are continuing to inflate and are primarily crude led,” chief financial officer Srinivas Phatak said in the analyst call. “Further inflation in input cost is a watch out for us, which we need to keep a close track on.”Tax experts say the problem may be to do with fuzzy procedural guidelines on how anti-profiteering is enforced and a perception issue for several consumer facing businesses.“If there is a genuine reason to raise prices, there is no reason not to do so,” said Anita Rastogi, indirect tax partner, PwC India. “This might be a perception issue for companies because brands and reputations are at stake. If prices are raised, there is a chance that companies might receive consumer complaints against them,” she said.The National Anti-Profiteering Authority, set up to enforce anti-profiteering rules under the GST, can act on complaints that companies have not cut prices for a product on which GST has been reduced.So far, the body has begun investigations into complaints that Hardcastle Restaurants Pvt. Ltd (operator of fast food chain McDonald’s in south and west India), apparel chain Lifestyle International Pvt. Ltd, and a dealer for HUL products, Mint reported on 2 January.Hindustan Unilever also made provisions worth Rs119 crore to be passed on as benefits to consumers because the firm was unable to drop prices fast enough once the tax rates were revised in November.With input prices rising, companies will soon have to raise prices to protect their margins. For firms such as Hindustan Unilever and Marico, detergents and hair oils—affected most by rising prices—make a sizeable chunk of their revenues.The government, however, does not have any immediate plans to issue guidelines to make anti-profiteering rules clearer, according to Prashant Deshpande, indirect tax partner at Deloitte.
Dabur India appears to be in a good place and that explains why its shares have done well in recent quarters.Dabur India Ltd joined the legion of packaged consumer goods firms reporting eye-watering growth rates, helped by a low base and the return of a more normal market situation after the roll-out of the goods and services tax (GST). While Dabur’s profitability rose substantially, it may be tested by the company holding on to sticker prices in the next few quarters, even as costs increase. In categories such as foods, where sales growth is flagging, the company may settle for lower margins to get higher growth.Dabur’s domestic sales (adjusted for GST’s accounting effects) rose by 17.7% from a year ago, while volumes grew by 13% and would have been higher but for flat growth in its foods business. Its international business saw sales increase by 5% on a constant currency basis, pulling down overall adjusted constant currency sales growth to 12.9%.The highlight of Dabur’s results was its home and personal care business, which grew by 22.9% led by growth in segments such as oral care, hair oils, shampoos and home care. In the healthcare segment, which includes health supplements such as chyawanprash and honey, sales rose by 16.6%. Dabur seems to have responded well to the challenge from Patanjali Ayurved Ltd in some of its main products such as oral care and honey. Even in the September quarter, sales growth was relatively healthy. The fading away of this threat, for now, should come as a relief to investors.In foods, there were some one-off effects such as a high growth in the base quarter a year ago and an earlier Diwali, which saw gifting sales shift to the second quarter. Competition too is playing a role, however. The company’s management said it will sacrifice some margins if need be in this category, to revive sales growth.Contrary to what other firms have been saying, Dabur’s management said that demand has slowed down in the current fiscal year and it is looking forward to the government’s measures in the budget to boost rural demand. If Dabur’s sales growth still looks cheery, it attributes that to its own efforts and indicates it has taken share from its competitors or by improving availability of its products. Till demand growth revives, that will remain its primary source of sales growth.The company’s margins widened by 180 basis points from a year ago, after adjusting for GST. This can last for a quarter or so, as it still has inventories of materials bought when prices were cheaper. But inputs such as crude oil-based derivatives and coconut oil have become expensive. Eventually, these will see costs rise. If demand remains weak, Dabur may prefer to absorb some of those increases so that volume growth remains robust. Also, the government’s frowning upon price increases during the initial quarters of GST may see it restrain itself from hiking prices. These margins, therefore, should not be taken for granted.The international business performance is a bit disappointing, as it is for most consumer goods firms that ventured overseas. Dabur expects this to improve from the fourth quarter, as underlying conditions in the countries it is present in are improving. Translation losses due to currency fluctuations are expected to be lower as well, which affects reported growth.Dabur appears to be in a good place and that explains why its shares have done well in recent quarters. They are trading at 39 times the projected earnings per share for FY19, based on the mean of analyst estimates compiled by Reuters. What could lend this relatively high valuation more support is if consumer demand steps up even by a bit while the main risk is from input cost inflation rising higher than expected.
Retail inflation rose to a 17-month high of 5.21% in December, the latest official reading showed, possibly pressuring the central bank to tighten monetary policy. Photo: BloombergBengaluru: Indian factory growth cooled to a three-month low in January as weaker domestic demand dragged on output despite firms keeping price increases to a minimum, a business survey showed on Thursday.The Nikkei Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index, compiled by IHS Markit, fell to 52.4 last month from December’s 54.7.While the latest reading undershot the 54.5 expected in a Reuters poll of economists, the index has now stayed above the 50 mark that separates growth from contraction for a sixth month.“Following December’s stellar performance, growth in the Indian manufacturing economy lost some impetus, reflected by slower growth in output, new orders and employment,” Aashna Dodhia, an economist at IHS Markit, said in a release.“Nevertheless, these key PMI indicators registered in expansion territory signalling the sector stayed on its track to recovery.”The new orders sub-index, a proxy for domestic demand, slumped to 53.0 from December’s 56.8, which in turn pushed firms to slow the pace of hiring to a three month low.That suggests the economy is still struggling to recover from a weaker demand trend seen since the ban of high-value currency notes in November 2016 and the chaotic roll out of a goods and services tax (GST) last year.And output growth eased last month to a three-month low and could wobble in the months ahead on GST woes.“The goods and services tax somewhat continues to remain a risk to business performance as firms faced further delayed payments,” Dodhia said.Asia’s third largest economy is expected to grow 6.6% this fiscal year ending March, which would be its weakest in four years, a Reuters poll found last month.But strong global growth is tipped to keep foreign demand intact, a factor duly reflected in the PMI survey which showed new export orders rose at their fastest pace in almost 1-1/2 years.While firms continued to absorb the increase in cost pressures, they did pass on some of that to consumers in January, suggesting a recent trend of inflation above the Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) medium-term target of 4% could be here to stay.Retail inflation rose to a 17-month high of 5.21% in December, the latest official reading showed, possibly pressuring the central bank to tighten monetary policy.The RBI is scheduled to meet for the first time in 2018 on 6-7 February, which will come after finance minister Arun Jaitley presents his annual budget due later on Thursday. Reuters
“The FM’s announcement of application of 25% tax rates to MSMEs with a new threshold of Rs250 crore while welcome is still narrow in impact on the economy and business. Still lot more to be done to increase India’s competitive advantage as the headline tax rates are falling all across the world, with now even US joining and leading the race,” said Milind Kothari, managing partner at consultancy BDO India.While a favourable tax regime may not have been the reason for the surge in domestic flows to the equities market, removing the tax advantage can affect sentiment and flows to this segment. Photo: BloombergFears about a long-term capital gains (LTCG) tax being imposed in the Union Budget 2018 had wreaked havoc in the markets in recent trading sessions. A day ahead of the budget speech, three-fourths of the stocks comprising the BSE 500 index had fallen by 10% or more from their 52-week highs. Over a third of these stocks fell over 20%.In short, traders and investors had already been factoring in an additional tax burden to some extent. In this backdrop, the finance minister’s decision to bring back LTCG isn’t a negative surprise. Besides, the government has softened the blow by putting in a grandfathering clause to protect gains made until 31 January 2018. It has also said that only gains in excess of Rs1 lakh will be taxed. As such, it isn’t the body blow some had feared.Still, the new LTCG regime is a negative for the equities market. A number of investors will now need to factor in an additional 10% tax burden on new equity investments. This alters the risk-reward equation for Indian equities meaningfully, especially at a time when bond yields both globally and in the domestic market are on the rise.So, on the one hand, returns on debt instruments are rising—yields on the benchmark 10-year bond have risen from 6.9% three months ago to 7.6% currently. On the other hand, post-tax returns on equity investments have to factor in a 10% haircut.The new tax will also make offshore centres such as Singapore more cost effective to trade, which is strange from a policy perspective given that Singapore Exchange is out to garner a greater share of trading in Indian stocks.While a favourable tax regime may not have been the reason for the surge in domestic flows to the equities market, removing the tax advantage can affect sentiment and flows to this segment. Note that domestic flows were largely behind the rally in Indian stocks in 2017. As such, if flows to the market from domestic investors slow down, the markets may well stutter in 2018.Also note that stocks derive their value from post-tax cash flows of a company. Some experts argue that equity investors are, hence, taxed multiple times. First, the companies in which they own shares pay corporation tax. Then, tax is deducted when the company pays out dividend. Large investors also pay an additional tax on dividend income in excess of Rs10 lakh. Besides, everyone pays securities transaction tax (STT) while dealing in stocks on stock exchanges. And now, you have LTCG.The irony here is that STT was introduced when LTCG was abolished. The reintroduction of LTCG hasn’t been accompanied with any relaxation on the STT front—there is no offset even. The crib about multiple levels of taxation for an equity investor, therefore, has some merit.But leave aside the theoretical argument on whether LTCG is warranted or not. With one of the selling points about equity investments being taken away, an uncertainty arises as far as domestic flows go, and to that extent, the markets should be worried.The silver lining in the budget is that it seems prudent on the expenditure side, especially for what is possibly the last budget before the next general election. There are no major dole outs. While there is an increased allocation for higher minimum support prices, overall, expenses have been kept under a fairly tight rein. As such, the announced target of a 3.3% fiscal deficit is something equity investors wouldn’t fret much about.Having said that, the budget may prove to be inflationary, which is something that is also reflected in the sell-off in the bond market. Which brings us to the point about the equity markets shrugging off macroeconomic concerns that the bond markets seemed to be quite worried about.While the budget doesn’t factor in a huge increase in collections from the new goods and services tax (GST), the fact remains that this will play a large role in balancing budgets in the coming year. “The equity market has pinned high hopes on increased government spending on housing and rural economy, which will drive consumption demand in FY2019. However, the government’s ability to spend will depend on its fiscal position. The market’s optimism may be belied if GST revenues were to fail to pick up meaningfully from current levels,” analysts at Kotak Institutional Equities wrote in a note to clients last month.In sum, the budget may not have huge positives or negatives for the market; but how things play out with respect to GST collections and the impact of LTCG can have a meaningful impact on the course of the markets this year.