There were few happy faces in India after the Budget speech got over, except for the senior citizens. Since we don’t have representatives of Bharat in the TV studios or as talking heads, their reaction does not get captured. Budget 2018 has given a big push to Bharat and tightened India a bit more. Bharat has got targeted spends on a whole range of items, from electrification to a massive health insurance programme—probably the biggest in the world.Senior citizens should be happy. The morning laughing club should be laughing harder. They have reason to because they are possibly the only middle India cohort that gets to take home more money. Interest income for them will be exempt from tax up to Rs50,000, up from Rs10,000. This means that if a 60-plus person had an income of, say, Rs10 lakh as interest, she will now be taxed on Rs9.5 lakh, other exemptions and deductions remaining the same. The deduction on premiums on health insurance is up from Rs30,000 to Rs50,000. This is good because privately bought health covers for senior citizens are very expensive. The Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana has been extended till March 2020, and the Rs7.5 lakh-limit is doubled. A 60-plus person can now get an assured 8.3% annual return on Rs15 lakh of investment. A couple that has invested Rs30 lakh, can earn an interest of Rs2.49 lakh a year from it. These are important changes for a generation that is sitting on pension corpuses that were earned on pre-liberalization salaries, and which is finding today’s costs prohibitive.Salary earners were first patted on the back by the FM when he said that they pay an average of Rs76,306 in tax in a year as compared to the business and professional tax payers who pay a paltry Rs25,753. To make amends he gave a standard deduction of Rs40,000. But the devil is in the detail—the real benefit was reduced to just Rs5,800 a year, or just Rs1,810 in tax saved for the 31.2% tax slab. Yup, the additional cess of 1% takes up the 30.9% tax bracket even further. The FM has given the standard deduction in lieu of the current exemption for travel and medical reimbursements from the place of work. Both these exemptions total up to Rs34,200, giving us a benefit of just a few thousand rupees.The much dreaded long-term capital gains tax finally made a re-entry into our lives. Profits on equity on which the securities transaction tax has been paid and that have been held for more than one year will now be taxed at 10% if they exceed Rs1 lakh in a year. This is to harvest some of the Rs3.6 trillion-profits made in FY17. But your gains made have been grandfathered as on 31 January 2018. Suppose you had Rs5 lakh in long-term profits as on 31 January 2018, these will not be taxed. Profits made from then on, will be taxed. The Budget also plugs a loophole. Now a 10% tax will be levied on distributed income by equity oriented mutual funds.The big announcement in the Budget takes the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) that insured the poor for Rs30,000 on medical expenses, further. The National Health Protection Scheme will hike this to Rs5 lakh per family for each year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalization. Over 100 million families, or 500 million people, will benefit. This will be the world’s largest government funded healthcare programme. The government will hopefully put in tighter controls on both insurance companies and hospitals on claims and costs. It must understand that as a large buyer it can beat down premiums and force hospitals to behave better. I expect an overall benefit as the sectors see a clean-up.In an unusual move, the government has told the financial sector regulators to reduce their fixation on AA-rated bonds as being investment worthy and reduce it to A. Aimed at developing the bond market, surely it need not have taken a Budget announcement for the regulators to come to this conclusion on their own. A focus on fintech, the use of technology and the use of machine readable financial information in the future are steps in the right direction.The fiscal deficit is not badly overshot at 3.5% and promises to be down to 3.3% next year. We need to worry about the deficit number because a large deficit usually means inflation. There were big worries on a spending splurge by the government in this pre-election year, but the conservative deficit number and a promise to be good once the GST inflows settle down is a big positive. No wonder the stock market can’t decide whether to go up or down.Monika Halan works in the area of consumer protection in finance. She is consulting editor Mint and on the board of FPSB India. She can be reached at monika.h@livemint.com.
Bond market participants will be keeping a close eye on non-tax revenues of the government, momentum in GST collections, as well as government expenditure. Photo: Hemant Mishra/MintThe Union budget for the next fiscal year attempts to do a fine balancing act between being populist and at the same time pragmatic.From a policy perspective, the announcement of a new National Health Protection Scheme (NHPS) was the most significant, but the budget also had a distinct rural and infrastructure thrust and tax goodies for micro small and medium enterprises (MSMEs).The new NHPS scheme—India’s version of Obamacare—proposes to provide 100 million poor and vulnerable families coverage of up to Rs5 lakh per family per year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalisation. The scheme is certainly ambitious as it proposes to cover a whopping one-third of Indian households.As of March 2017, around 440 million Indians were covered under health insurance schemes, and the NHPS could potentially more than double this coverage. The modalities of implementation of the scheme have not been specified, but the administration would certainly be challenging given the scale envisaged and paucity of health infrastructure in large swathes of the country.More significantly, the budgetary allocation to this scheme seems inadequate and, therefore, it is likely that this scheme will be administered over a period of time rather than having any immediate impact.For MSMEs, the reduction in corporate income tax rate to 25% for all companies having a turnover of up to Rs250 crore in fiscal year 2017 is clearly a positive. This, along with the proposal to onboard public sector banks and corporates on the Trade Electronic Receivable Discounting System (TReDS) platform and link this with Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN), will help improve the cash flows of MSMEs.Extending fixed-term employment, currently applicable only to apparel and footwear sectors, to all sectors is another significant step in the direction of labour reforms.The decision to fix the minimum support price (MSP) of all crops at least at 50% more than their cost of production and liberalize the export of agri-commodities will help support agricultural incomes, but at the same time runs the risk of fanning inflationary pressures. The proposal to evolve a suitable mechanism to make available credit to tenant farmers without compromising on the rights of the land owners is also structurally significant, as around one-quarter of agricultural output in India comes from tenant farmers.On the infrastructure side, while outlays to traditional segments such as roads, railways and power has increased at a modest pace, there is a strong push given to affordable housing and education.The budget also lacked big ideas to boost consumption, which would be a disappointment for consumption-oriented sectors, although the rural thrust could provide some succour. The salaried class, particularly, would have been hoping for more. While benefit of standard deduction of Rs40,000 has been provided, the tax benefits on transport allowance and reimbursement of medical expenses has been removed—the cumulative benefit on both these counts was Rs34,600—and the cess on personal income tax has been increased by one percentage point, which would more than offset the benefit of standard deduction.The corporate bond market should get a fillip from the proposed move to relax regulations to permit investments in bonds with a credit rating of “A” as also nudge large corporates to meet about one-fourth of their financing needs from the bond market.Bond market participants though will be keeping a close eye on non-tax revenues of the government, momentum in GST collections, as well as government expenditure. Any slippage on these counts would impact the fiscal deficit target, pegged at 3.3% for fiscal 2019. The yields on the benchmark 10-year government security jumped 20 basis points on budget day (compared to the previous closing), indicating caution over the fiscal position of the government.The imposition of long-term capital gains tax on sale of equity shares was a widely expected move. The proposal to grandfather gains made up to 31 January 2018 though will limit the impact. Inflows into equity mutual funds, particularly from outside the top 15 cities, could be adversely impacted by the proposal to tax distributed income of equity-oriented mutual funds at 10%. These cities—called B15 cities—cumulatively account for around 20% of assets under management of the mutual fund industry.All in all, the budget does a reasonable job of catering to urgent policy priorities like supporting agriculture and MSMEs, enhancing the social security net, and giving a fillip to infrastructure creation. The key over the next one year would be to match the stated intent with implementation without slipping on the fiscal.Nagarajan Narasimhan is business head and senior director, CRISIL ResearchUnion Budget 2018 could pose some additional downside risks for fiscal deficit. Photo: Indranil Bhoumik/Mint
The National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government’s last full-fledged budget before the elections next year, was widely expected to deviate modestly from fiscal deficit targets, while prioritising its expenditure outlays on areas that could support the ongoing economic recovery and also address some of the critical issues plaguing the rural and agricultural sectors. Additionally, an area of interest was the forecast on revenue buoyancy for FY2019, given that the series of structural reforms carried out over the last couple of years were primarily expected to provide a fillip to tax revenues—both direct and indirect.
The budget has expectedly focused on the rural, agricultural and MSME sector with a series of policy announcements designed to improve farmers’ income, provide extensive health coverage, facilitate credit flow to MSMEs and significantly increase targets for disbursements under the MUDRA Yojana. Similarly, there has been an increase in the outlay on the infrastructure sectors.However, the total capital outlay, including gross budgetary support and the internal extra budgetary resources of various ministries is estimated to grow by only 3.8% in FY2019 budget estimates (BE) compared to FY2018 RE (real estimates). Clearly, more than budgetary allocations, there would be increased reliance on funding public investments through borrowings by public sector units, SPVs (special purpose vehicles) like the affordable housing fund and through monetisation of assets like the toll-operate-transfer model being implemented by the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI).Given the disruption in revenues following structural changes such as the introduction of the goods and services tax (GST), and the need to boost government expenditure to prop up growth, the government of India has expectedly indicated a deviation of 30 basis points (bps) each in its fiscal deficit, relative to the previously announced targets for FY2018 and FY2019. However, following a pause in FY2018, it intends to revert to fiscal consolidation, aiming to pare its fiscal deficit-to-GDP ratio to 3.3% in FY2019 BE from 3.5% in FY2018 RE.The forecast of 11.5% for growth of nominal GDP for FY2019 appears realistic. Excluding the GST compensation cess, the pace of growth of the gross tax revenues of the government of India is estimated to rise sharply to 15.7% in FY2019 BE from 9.8% in FY2018 RE, led by an expected stabilisation of indirect taxes after the disruption related to the GST. Moreover, non-tax revenues are forecast to rise by 3.9% in FY2019 BE after having contracted by 13.5% in FY2018 RE, led by lower dividends from PSUs (public sector units) and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) as well as a dip in inflows from the telecom sector. While the target for disinvestment and strategic divestment has been reduced to Rs80,000 crore in FY2019 BE from Rs1 trillion in FY2018 RE, it may nevertheless be challenging to complete solely through the market route.With the GST having been implemented, there were no changes expected on the indirect tax front. There has been an increase in customs duty on several items which is expected to provide a boost to local manufactures of such products. The reduction in tax rates for corporates with a turnover of less than Rs250 crore would primarily benefit sectors like textiles, leather and ceramic tiles, which are highly fragmented and have a large number of small players. The ongoing resolution process under the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) has been provided favourable tax treatment in terms of carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation and brought forward losses even in the case of change of ownership.The budget reiterated its commitment to support and deepen the corporate bond markets, including lowering the threshold rating level for investments, rationalising stamp duty across states and possibility of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi) mandating large corporates to meet one-fourth of their financing requirements through the bond route. The extent to which this provides a fillip to lower-rated corporates accessing the bond markets remains to be seen, given the presence of several other headwinds.Overall, the budget is clearly focussed on the rural and social sectors with the objective of increasing agricultural income and improving the quality of rural infrastructure and healthcare. Smaller corporates would benefit from the tax rate cut. However, with the hardening of bond yields, there will be some impact on the cost of borrowings for all entities. Also, the funding pattern of many of the ambitious schemes is not clear, and the provision for the oil and fertiliser subsidy appears modest. These could pose some additional downside risks for fiscal deficit.Anjan Ghosh is chief rating officer, ICRA Ltd
States will get Rs90,000 crore of GST compensation from the Union govt for their revenue losses in the next fiscal, up from the Rs60,500 crore they are to get this financial year for the period since GST was implemented from 1 July Photo: MintNew Delhi: The central government’s revenue from goods and services tax (GST), which has shown signs of improvement in January, is projected to pick up double-digit growth momentum in FY19 and stabilize over the medium term, according to budget documents.The centre’s GST receipts estimated at Rs4.4 trillion for eight months of tax collection up to March is set to grow to Rs7.4 trillion in full FY19, suggesting an 11.5% annual growth.The combined GST receipts for central and state governments stood at Rs86,703 crore in January when 5.63 million assessees filed returns, up from Rs80,808 crore collected a month ago from 5.3 million filers. December collections were the lowest since August, the first month of tax collection in the new indirect tax regime.“GST revenues are expected to rise once matching of invoices and e-Way bills come into full swing. If we were to allow for expansion of the indirect tax base due to the increase in the number of indirect tax filers in the GST regime and a higher tax realisation in the economy, then we may safely conclude that the indirect tax buoyancy may show an increase in the medium to long run,” said a statement that is part of the Union budget.State governments will get Rs90,000 crore of GST compensation from the Union government for their revenue losses in the next fiscal, up from the Rs60,500 crore they are to get this financial year for the period since GST was implemented from 1 July.If tax receipts from excise duty on items outside GST such as petroleum products and basic customs duty are included, indirect tax receipts of the central government is projected to grow by 17.3% to Rs11.1 trillion in 2018-19 over the revised estimate of 2017-18.The GST administration has been lenient in the initial months of the tax reform to ease the rigours of compliance and to handhold taxpayers. Electronic permits for movement of goods, which were to become compulsory from 1 February, has been deferred to give more time to businesses and transporters to settle into the system.