Most of these are stores opened by the brand before ABFRL acquired the licence for Forever21 from previous partners DLF Brands and Diana Retail.

Mumbai: Aditya Birla Fashion and Retail Ltd (ABFRL), the licensee of American fast fashion brand Forever21, is downsizing the brand’s stores and cutting costs as sales from the fast fashion business decline, a top company executive said.

ABFRL reported a loss of Rs23 crore in the fast fashion business during the quarter ended December 2017, even as sales from the business declined 14% from a year earlier to Rs114 crore (net sales value, or NSV). Loss widened because Forever21 took a one-time inventory hit, Ashish Dikshit, managing director of ABFRL’s Madura Lifestyle business, said in an investor call on Friday. However, NSV comparisons were also affected by changes in GST rates.

“The Rs23 crore loss in fast fashion is mostly because of Forever21, Rs15-16 crore is a one-time inventory markdown after rationalizing the business,” Dikshit said in the conference call.

“Assumptions have changed for the Forever21 business,” Dikshit added. “We recognize that the current business needed significant restructuring—store resizing, a new store model, renegotiations.”

ABFRL has reduced the sizes of its oldest stores and will now focus on opening new but smaller stores, he said. Most of these are stores opened by the brand before ABFRL acquired the licence for Forever21 from previous partners DLF Brands and Diana Retail.

“Size, cost, and competition impacted legacy stores in Forever21, they were much bigger than the business model deserves,” Dikshit said. “The cost was much higher than it deserved.”

Fast fashion brands including Zara and H&M usually operate stores of 25,000-50,000 sq. ft around the world and in India. ABFRL did not specify how small the new stores will be.

“We are at 22 stores, will continue to remain reasonably conservative, moderate for some time to ensure every new store is on a tight commercial model,” Dikshit added. “We will open 6-8 stores a year at this time in a model driven by revenue share models and capital investment from builders. This is unlike a year back where we were investing a lot and focusing on growth.”

“Our internal assumptions for growth were very high in this business, but the profitability requires deeper correction and we realized that we had built up a lot of inventory which we needed to know what do with it,” Dikshit added.

ABFRL is expecting the fast fashion business to turn around by the next quarter, driven by high double digit like to like growth in sales. Like to like refers to growth in sales from stores that have been open for the same period of time. The firm has been focusing on cost cutting to help boost margins, primarily through renegotiating rents and reducing store sizes wherever possible including for Pantaloons, the firm’s departmental store chain.

Forever21’s flailing performance and restructuring comes at a time when fast fashion peers Zara and H&M are doing brisk business in India. Swedish fast fashion retailer H&M doubled its annual sales in India (for the year ending November 2017) to worth Rs957 crore, Mint reported on 1 February. It also increased its store count from 15 to a total of 27, led by new stores in tier II cities including Indore, Coimbatore, and Amritsar.

Meanwhile, Spanish fast fashion retailer Zara closed FY16-17 with Rs1,023 crore in sales and 20 stores, according to the latest available data. Parent Inditex SA operates Zara stores in a joint venture with Trent Ltd, a Tata Group company. Zara also launched its own e-commerce website in India in October last year.
For most of India’s corporates, the budget’s measures of higher rural spending, lower corporate taxes, and relaxing restrictions on the ability of financial intermediaries to invest in lower rated corporate bonds are credit positive, Moody’s added. Photo: Bloomberg

New Delhi: The budget for 2018-19 strikes a balance between fiscal prudence and growth, and a “slight” slippage in fiscal deficit has no material impact on overall economic strength, according to Moody’s Rating Services.

The government has revised its 2018-19 fiscal deficit projections to 3.3% of GDP and for the current fiscal to 3.5% of GDP, against original targets of 3% and 3.2%, respectively. “The revised fiscal consolidation path is modestly shallower than the previous roadmap, but does not fundamentally alter India’s overall fiscal strength,” says William Foster, vice president-senior credit officer at Moody’s.

The medium-term target to reduce the central government debt-to-GDP ratio to 40% is supportive of the sovereign credit profile, Foster said. Moody’s in a statement said India’s budget for the fiscal year ending March 2019 strikes a balance between fiscal prudence and growth.

“Slight slippage in the budget deficit targets has no material impact on the country’s overall fiscal strength and is in line with Moody’s expectations,” it said.

The budget benefits corporates as well as infrastructure and insurance sectors, said Joy Rankothge, vice president, senior analyst. Moody’s expects that the government will meet next year’s deficit target, based on achievable budget assumptions and demonstrated commitment to fiscal prudence.

“However, some ambitious revenue assumptions and uncertainty about some spending items could result in a shortfall to overall fiscal consolidation,” Moody’s said.

“The projected expenditure restraint and strong revenue growth are likely to be broadly achieved, although some measures such as the rule guiding increases in Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) and ambitious GST revenue targets could result in some further slippage,” Foster said.

The formal adoption—as stated by finance minister Arun Jaitley when he announced the budget—of key recommendations by the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Committee (FRBM) as “credit positive”. These include the objective to bring down the central government debt-to-GDP ratio to 40% (from about 50% today) and use of the fiscal deficit target as the government’s key operational parameter, Moody’s said.

For most of India’s corporates, the budget’s measures of higher rural spending, lower corporate taxes, and relaxing restrictions on the ability of financial intermediaries to invest in lower rated corporate bonds are credit positive, it added.

The infrastructure sector will benefit from a boost in spending and the government’s continued focus on public investment will also help galvanise India’s upturn in capital spending, Moody’s said.

Finally, the insurance market will benefit from the launch of a national health scheme and the merger, as well as listing, of three state-owned insurers. “The insurance, and in particular non-life market, is set to benefit from the growth prospects provided by the widening of universal health insurance cover,” it added.
Colgate-Palmolive’s total expense stood at Rs790.47 crore as against Rs811.33 crore, down 2.57% from the previous fiscal. Photo: Mint

New Delhi: Fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) major Colgate-Palmolive India on Monday reported a rise of 33.50% in its net profit at Rs170.65 crore for the third quarter ended December 2017 led by volume growth.

The company had posted a net profit of Rs127.82 crore in October-December period of the last year, Colgate-Palmolive India said in a BSE filing. Its total income was up 4.01% to Rs1,042.36 crore during the quarter under review as against Rs1,002.12 crore in the corresponding quarter of the last fiscal.

“Excluding the accounting impact of GST implementation, net sales increased by 19 per cent over the previous year. Volume increased by 12 per cent,” Colgate-Palmolive India said in a statement. Colgate-Palmolive’s total expense stood at Rs790.47 crore as against Rs811.33 crore, down 2.57% from the previous fiscal.

Shares of Colgate-Palmolive India were trading 0.53% up at Rs1,120.95 apiece on BSE on Monday.
