Balancing its concerns on inflation, the monetary policy committee also acknowledged that economic recovery is in a nascent stage and needs to be supported. Photo: Ramesh Pathania/MintThe monetary policy committee in its last meeting for the financial year voted to keep the repo rate unchanged at 6% and maintain a neutral stance. The accompanying statement struck a balanced tone, pointing out that while the risks to inflation are on the upside and hence vigilance is required, a nascent recovery is in the offing and that needs to be supported too. The decision was, however, not unanimous as one member voted for a 25 basis points rate hike. The underlying growth and inflation forecasts and the uncertainties around the inflation outlook seem to have prompted the majority of the MPC to seek more clarity through income data and other developments.The guidance on the future path of inflation is cautious. Headline CPI inflation is expected to rise from an average of 4.6% in Q3 to 5.1% in Q4 and range between 5.1% and 5.6% in the first half of FY19, before easing to 4.5-4.6% in the second half. The balance of risks to this trajectory are on the upside and emanate from higher oil prices, rising non-oil inputs costs being passed to output prices and elevated household inflation expectations. Overall inflation outlook is subject to significant uncertainty from the staggered impact of implementation of HRA hikes by states, fiscal slippage, and changing expectations about the pace of global monetary policy normalization. The statement also notes that the new guidelines for fixing MSPs for the kharif crop in 2018 is an area of uncertainty and any impact assessment on inflation is difficult at this stage.Interestingly, easing inflation in the second half of the next fiscal year assumes softer food inflation, and that may actually turn out to be the key source of upward drift from the RBI’s trajectory. It is reasonable to assume that the under the new formula and ahead of the national elections next year, average MSP increases may turn out to be larger than what the government has provided in the last four years. That, in turn, would stoke food inflation even with a normal monsoon and lead to higher-than-anticipated inflation. It thus appears that while the balance of risks is seen on the upside, the overall approach on the future guidance on inflation is less conservative than in the past.Balancing its concerns on inflation, MPC also acknowledged that economic recovery is in a nascent stage and needs to be supported. RBI projects real GVA growth to pick up to 7.2% in FY19, up from 6.6% growth forecast in the current fiscal and the risks to this growth path are evenly balanced.RBI continues to project higher growth in FY18 versus the CSO’s advance estimate of 6.1%. Signs of revival in investment activity and stabilization of GST implementation, are seen driving growth higher over this year and the next. This appears to be a reasonable estimate of growth, considering the recent improvement in manufacturing sector activity and a synchronized pick-up in global economic activity. However, weak private services sector activity (as seen from PMI services reading hovering close to the 50 mark) and the drag from net external demand are something which could impart some downside to this forecast.Going forward, the path of monetary policy would be dependent on how the actual inflation and GDP growth evolve. If the headline CPI inflation follows the guidance path, then a prolonged pause on policy rates will remain as the base case. However, the upside risks to inflation (especially from food inflation and rising commodity prices) may outweigh the downside from low capacity utilization and possible correction in oil prices. The likelihood of actual inflation drifting towards the upper level of the inflation tolerance band (6%) has therefore increased. That may call for not only vigilance on inflation but a pre-emptive rate hike in July or August without changing the neutral stance. For the policy stance to change to hawkish, not only do some of the inflation risks have to gain strength, but even the growth out-turn has to be better than the RBI projections, thereby stoking demand-push inflation.Gaurav Kapur is the chief economist of IndusInd Bank Ltd. Views are personal.
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) revised its inflation estimate for Q4 FY2018 to 5.1%, above its earlier forecast of 4.3-4.7% for H2 FY2018. Photo: AFPThe last planned review of the monetary policy committee (MPC) for FY2018 did not offer many surprises. In line with our expectations, it left the repo rate unchanged at 6%, retained the neutral stance of monetary policy and reiterated the commitment toward achieving the medium-term inflation target of 4%.As anticipated, the decision to keep the repo rate unchanged was not unanimous, with one MPC member voting for a hike of 25 basis points (bps). Additionally, the inflation forecast for Q4 FY2018 was revised upward, while the baseline expectation for GVA growth for FY2018 was pared mildly.However, the tone of the policy outlook was less hawkish than what the markets had started to fear. The caution regarding the need for vigilance around the evolving inflation scenario clouded by upside risks was counterbalanced by the emphasis on nurturing the nascent recovery through conducive and stable macro-financial management.To recap, the CPI inflation spiked to 5.2% in December 2017, overshooting MPC’s earlier forecast. In maintaining status quo, MPC appears to have looked through the impact of the revision in house rent allowance (HRA) for central government employees on the uptick in the CPI inflation. Moreover, the presence of mitigants, such as subdued capacity utilization, moderate rural wage growth and the possibility of crude oil prices receding from current levels, supported MPC’s decision to maintain rates and persist with the neutral stance.Nevertheless, the sixth bi-monthly policy statement highlighted various risks, including the first and second round impact of the staggered revision in HRA by state governments; the possibility that firms may pass on higher global commodity prices to consumers; and the proposals made in the Union budget for FY2019 to augment minimum support prices (MSP), increase customs duty on certain items, and delay fiscal consolidation. In particular, MPC commented that the fiscal slippage has started to raise economy-wide costs of borrowing, which may spark inflationary pressures going forward. Based on these risks, MPC revised its inflation estimate for Q4 FY2018 (including the HRA impact) to 5.1%, above its earlier forecast of 4.3-4.7% for H2 FY2018. Moreover, it expects CPI inflation to harden to 5.1-5.6% in H1 FY2019, followed by a moderation to 4.5-4.6% in H2 FY2019, albeit with risks tilted to the upside. The expected softening in inflation in H2 FY2019 is attributed a favourable base effect related to the waning impact of the HRA revision from July 2018 onwards, and the expectation that a normal monsoon and effective supply management would dampen food inflation. Overall, MPC emphasized caution about the evolving inflation scenario.MPC mildly revised its baseline expectation for GVA growth for FY2018 to 6.6% from 6.7%. It pegged the GVA growth forecast for FY2019 at 7.2% with risks evenly balanced, with an anticipated easing from 7.3-7.4% in H1 FY2019 to 7.1-7.2% in H2 FY2019. It attributed the improvement in FY2019 GVA growth to factors such as the stabilization of the economy after the transition to GST; signs of a nascent investment revival provided by rising credit growth, equity fundraising, imports and capital goods production; the ongoing recapitalisation of public sector banks; and the prospect of rising exports on the back of an improving global economy. However, it warned of downside risks from the deterioration in public finances, which might crowd out private financing and investment.Looking ahead, the emphasis placed by the committee on nurturing the fledgling recovery and on stability suggests that it would prefer to wait for additional data on the extent to which the upside risks to inflation materialize. Therefore, it is unlikely to hike rates in the immediate term, in our view. However, if CPI inflation exceeds MPC’s forecast in a sustained manner, a rate hike toward the second half of 2018 may not be ruled out.The softer-than-expected tone of the policy document should help to contain yields of government securities (G-secs) to some extent, even though the prospects of open market operations being conducted by the central bank to purchase G-secs appear dim. Regardless, global trends related to liquidity, inflation and interest rates would continue to influence the direction of Indian bond yields in the near term.Aditi Nayar is principal economist at Icra.
While Cipla’s relatively low sales growth is a dampener, the good showing on other fronts should comfort investors.The US pharmaceutical market is proving to be a trying one for Indian generic pharmaceutical firms. While Cipla Ltd can’t say it was an exception, it is relatively better off than some of its peers. But the pricing pressure in the US market has led to Cipla adjusting its research spending pattern. It will use its research budget (expensed in the profit and loss account) for its generic products and use acquisitions to take forward its ambitions in the speciality product space.That shift is a nod to the fact that a slower-than-expected US market sales growth could lead to research as a proportion of sales to increase faster. While this separation may help R&D as a percentage of sales to remain in check, the capital required (debt or equity) will put pressure on other parts of its profit and loss account, such as amortization or interest costs. But by focusing on late-stage candidates for acquisition, Cipla hopes to improve the odds of the product reaching market.The company’s US market sales grew by 2% to $100 million over a year ago and rose by 5% sequentially. This was despite new launches in the quarter and price erosion in other products pulling down growth. If its new products continue to ramp-up and it succeeds in getting some more key approvals, growth could improve. In India, sales recovered as the market returned to normalcy post-GST (goods and services tax) roll-out. Sales growth in South Africa was healthy too.Although Cipla’s overall sales grew by a relatively low 7.6%—10% adjusting for accounting effects of GST in India—it managed to do well on other fronts. Its gross profit margin (gross profit represents what is left over after deducting material costs from sales) improved, both over a year ago and sequentially. The company said a better product mix and favourable geographic share helped. It cautioned this could dip in the fourth quarter by a bit. It also kept employee costs and other expenses in check. As a result, its operating profit rose by 20.8% over a year ago.While Cipla’s relatively low sales growth is a dampener, the good showing on other fronts should comfort investors. However, it had to write down part of its acquisition of InvaGen, which cut into its net profit, and it rose by a mere 4.8% over a year ago. The company’s US business remains the key factor to watch, with a number of products in the pipeline.That Cipla does not have any regulatory issues at its plants is a significant differentiator, as there are no impediments to launching these products once it gets approval. Investors should watch for how its sales growth trend improves in the next few quarters, product approvals and acquisitions for its speciality pipeline.
Pernod’s India business was resilient through the impact of Supreme Court’s ban on all liquor sales along highways. But the regulatory environment in India is still uncertain and has led to a slowdown, notably in Punjab and Haryana, the company said on Thursday.Photo: BloombergBengaluru: French liquor company Pernod Ricard SA reported 9% sales growth in its India business from July to December 2017, driven by double-digit growth in its strategic international brands and strategic wines product portfolios.The company follows a July to June calendar.Pernod’s India business clocked a much slower 3% growth during the same six-month period in the previous year.Its strategic international brands include Jameson whiskies and Martell cognac, while it sells wines under labels such as Jacob’s Creek, Nine Hills and Brancott Estate in the country.“H1 FY18 (July to December 2017) was a very good semester with an acceleration versus FY17, in particular in China, India and global travel retail,” Alexandre Ricard, chairman and chief executive officer, said in a statement on the company’s website on Thursday.But the faster pace of growth in India in the current reporting year is also enhanced by a low base, the company said. In November 2016, demonetisation affected all businesses, and it is that hit that created a low base and improved growth rate in July-December 2017.Pernod, India’s second largest liquor firm, also said it has increased prices of its Seagram’s whiskies with the goal of offsetting an increase in input costs after the implementation of the goods and services tax (GST). GST does not include the alcoholic beverage industry under its remit, but raw materials used by the industry fall under the tax’s ambit and, thus, have pushed up input costs for the industry.Pernod’s India business was resilient through the impact of Supreme Court’s ban on all liquor sales along highways. But the regulatory environment in India is still uncertain and has led to a slowdown, notably in Punjab and Haryana, the company said on Thursday.“For full-year FY18 (July 2017 to June 2018), we will maintain our focus on digital, innovation and operational excellence (including pricing). We expect sustained and diversified growth to continue across our regions and brands. We are therefore increasing our guidance for full-year FY18 organic growth in profit from recurring operations to between 4% and 6%,” Ricard said.