India’s 2018-19 Budget is the first one after the implementation of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) in July 2017. It continues the government’s aim of making the Budget event not the sole economic and political event of the year; and to continue to shorten the Budget speeches. As a result of the GST, minimal indirect tax proposals needed to be made in the Budget, as these proposals are now being undertaken by the GST Council, a landmark forum under the Cooperative Federalism initiative.Continuing the broad approach to social protection: The Budget continues the government’s focus on enabling households, particularly low and middle income households, to gain access to a bundle of services (and to opportunities) needed to cope with various risks, including in old age. Instead of focusing on pension amounts or money per say, this approach focuses on services needed by the households, including elderly households. This is indeed more promising approach, well accepted in the pension literature. The Budget’s ‘pension sector’ proposals should therefore be not construed too narrowly, but as a part of broader concept of progressing towards a more robust social protection system for households.In the above context, two most significant social protection initiatives in the Budget, under the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ programme, concern mitigating health care risks, and making healthcare more accessible and affordable. The first proposal would set up 150,000 health centres across the country to bring healthcare services closer to the households. As these will also provide free (at point of consumption, not in economic terms as there are still resource costs) essential drugs and diagnostic services, the household expenditure on this area, particularly for the elderly, is likely to be reduced. This is equivalent to an increase in household income, while providing essential healthcare and health promotion services.The Budget allocation of Rs1,200 crore is to be supplemented with CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility), and philanthropic funds. More than funds, it is the managerial and technological expertise of the corporate and philanthropic sectors that could be useful. It is suggested that individual states set up specialized task forces to bring about synergy of these two sectors with these health centres. The second proposal is the initiation of National Health Protection Scheme (NHPS) to cover around 100 million families (that’s 500 million beneficiaries assuming an average family size of 5). The NHPS is an ambitious scheme to mitigate the risk that a major health episode could potentially push even middle-class households into poverty and in debt. Many middle income countries such as Indonesia have prioritized extending health coverage through similar sets of initiatives.The NHPS proposes to provide coverage up to Rs5 lakh per family per year. The scope of NHPS is substantially larger than the health insurance schemes operating currently, such as the (Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, which provides annual coverage of only Rs30,000 per year per family. While insurance mechanism does provide risk-pooling benefits, much depends on how the premiums are set (and how they are shared), and on the policy coherence and coordination among the central government and the states.The global experience suggests that minimizing opportunistic behaviour by various stakeholders; and using NHPS to facilitate more empirical analysis driven health insurance programme would be critical factors in achieving desired outcomes. The supply-side issues, particularly improving human and physical resources in healthcare, and improving quality of health organizations in both public and private sectors, would also need to be better addressed. Professional periodical actuarial evaluation of the programme, and flexibility to minimize contingent fiscal liabilities on the state of NHPS in case expenditure exceed receipts will also be needed.For the elderly, mitigating health risks is even more essential as health care expenditure as share of household expenditure increases with age.The focus of the Budget on accelerating focus on mitigating health risks is therefore appropriate. But health system management is complex as global experience suggests, and simply setting up an insurance method is insufficient. The Budget recognizes this. It is hoped that the NHPS initiative progresses in the spirit of Cooperative Federalism, the way the ambitious GST has been relatively successfully implemented.Specific measures affecting pensions: The proposals made in the Budget for the conventionally defined pension sector may be summarized as follows. They are relatively small, but of significant value to relevant groups of pension members. It is the cumulative impact of these that is of relevance in assessing the proposals.It is noteworthy that several of these proposals have time limits. This is sound design as it gives opportunity to review the relevance of the proposal in light of empirical evidence.First, income tax exemption on interest on fixed deposits, without TDS, up to Rs50,000 on deposits with banks and post offices, a significant five-fold increase. This will assist lower middle-income senior citizens as they tend to rely on this method of income for household expenses. Second, all senior citizens can now avail of deduction of health insurance premium of up to Rs50,000 (up from Rs30,000) under section 80D (of income tax Act). Third, the Budget also extends the Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana up to March 2020, under which 8% assured return by the LIC (Life Insurance Corporation of India) is provided for up to Rs15 lakh, double the current amount. This will mainly benefit the middle class. Fourth, the National Pension System (NPS) has a partial withdrawl provision, under which a member can withdraw up to 25% of own contributions for specified reasons including education, marriage, and healthcare. Such partial withdrawals will be tax exempt from 1 April 2018.It is suggested the partial withdrawal be permitted not just on the own contribution of the member, but also on accumulated returns obtained on this. This will increase the amount for withdrawal, particularly for home ownership, without significantly affecting final accumulation for pension. Appropriate prudential safeguards could be built into the withdrawal provisions to minimize unintended use of this privilege.Fifth, India’s Labour Force Participation Rate (LFPR) for women at less than 25% in 2015-16 needs to be increased significantly for both social and economic reasons. In the Budget, relatively small but significant steps to help improve India’s LFPR for both men and women, and to reduce cost of formal employment to the employer, have been proposed.(i) Government will contribute 12% of the wages of all new employees, men and women, to the Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF) for all sectors for the next 3 years. Combined with the provision for fixed term employment in all sectors, this could help enhance labour market efficiency.(ii) Contribution to the EPF for first 3 years of employment for women employees will be 8% as compared to 12% or 10% depending on the sectors.In conclusion, the Budget does continue promising broader approach to social protection and pensions sector. But concomitant reforms to help achieve desired outcomes, particularly for the Ayushman Bharat initiatives, will need to be carefully designed and implemented.Mukul Asher is professorial fellow, National University of Singapore
Higher GST collection will reduce the need for borrowing, both at the central and state levels, and would help reduce the interest rate in the bond market. Illustration: Jayachandran/MintThe State Bank of India, India’s largest lender by assets, surprised analysts last Friday by reporting a net loss of Rs2,416 crore for the third quarter of the current financial year. Apart from the issue of non-performing assets (NPAs), the big reason for slippage was higher provisioning on account of rising bond yields. Yields on the benchmark 10-year government bond have gone up by about 100 basis points since September 2017. The fall in bond prices will make things more difficult for public sector banks, as it will impede their plan to raise capital from the market and could further increase dependence on the government for capital infusion. This will also affect their ability to lend to the productive sectors of the economy at a time when investment is showing signs of revival.Apart from banks, higher rates will have an effect on at least two additional levels. First, as the Indian economy is witnessing signs of revival, lower interest rates would have augmented the recovery. A recent study by India Ratings and Research showed that Rs1 trillion worth of debt among the top 500 borrowers could potentially fall into the stress category if the interest rate increases by up to 75 basis points until 2018-19 from the effective rate of 9%. Higher interest rates will increase debt servicing cost for firms, affecting profitability and their ability to make investments. This would also put further strain on the banking system.Second, even though most of the government debt is at a fixed interest rate, a higher rate would mean higher interest outgo on fresh borrowing. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) had to cancel bond issuance in the recent past due to higher yields. However, it will now have to accept the market price to complete the borrowing requirement. The central bank has rightly indicated that it will not manage yields. An increase in interest payment will directly affect expenditure on developmental activities.However, in the given economic backdrop, it is likely that yields will remain elevated in the foreseeable future. The monetary policy committee of the RBI expects inflation to be in the range of 5.1% to 5.6% in the first half of the next financial year and moderate in the second half. Last week, in its bimonthly statement, the rate-setting committee highlighted at least six areas of uncertainty, which could affect the inflation outlook. It is possible that some of the risks will actually materialize and force the committee to raise the policy rate sometime in the next financial year.There are a number of factors that will keep bond prices under pressure. For instance, while it is being argued that the impact of raising minimum support price (MSP) to 1.5 times the production cost would be minimal, it is not clear how the government will compensate farmers who are not able to sell their produce at the MSP, as announced in the Union budget. This could significantly increase expenditure. Further, rabi sowing has been low this year, which can affect production and prices. It has been reported that wheat output could fall to a three-year low, resulting in a significant increase in imports.Although crude prices have moved both ways in recent months, it is a risk, especially in the context of strong global growth. Also, the rise in crude has not been fully passed on to the consumer. A higher retail price will push inflation or will affect government finances if oil companies take the hit. Both these possibilities will affect the bond market negatively.On the revenue side, it is important that the goods and services tax (GST) stabilizes soon. Any indication of further fiscal slippage will push up bond yields. The bond market will also be influenced by international factors. Tightening financial conditions in the global market—primarily owing to the possibility of faster than expected rate hikes in the US in response to a tightening labour market and higher fiscal deficit—will put pressure on bond prices. Significant reduction or reversal of capital flows would also affect the value of the rupee. While a depreciating rupee will help exports, it will also push inflation.Finally, the expected pickup in economic activity and demand for credit will also affect the cost of money in the economy.Therefore, the combination of possibilities suggests that the increase in bond yields is unlikely to be reversed significantly in the foreseeable future. While the overall economic outlook is positive, relatively lower market interest rates would have further supported the recovery. That said, things could change if crude witnesses a sharp correction or the GST collections surprise significantly on the upside in coming months. Higher GST collection will reduce the need for borrowing, both at the central and state levels, and would help reduce the interest rate in the bond market.Will higher bond yields affect economic recovery in India? Tell us at views@livemint.com
The latest RBI data showed that loans to MSMEs stood at Rs9.07 trillion as on 22 December 2017, up 10.6% from a year earlier. Photo: Aniruddha Chowdhury/MintMumbai: Electronic bill exchanges are the latest match-making venues for lenders seeking new clients and small entities desperate for capital.The fledgling exchanges, opened under the Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS), have attracted a host of lenders otherwise shy of financing companies with low credit ratings, since the new system allows them to find creditworthy clients and build new relationships.Typically, micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) that supply products or services to larger companies raise their bills (or trade receivables) but have to wait long to be paid, resulting in a shortage of working capital. Under TReDS, the MSME uploads the same bill on a TReDS bill discounting exchange, where lenders bid to buy the bill, depending on the creditworthiness of the bigger company. The selected lender—which offers the lowest discount or margin—pays the MSME, and later receives the payment from the larger company. It’s a win-win situation for both the MSME (which gets immediate cash) and the lender (which find new creditworthy customers, though with less risk due to the payment due from the larger company).Joining TReDS has helped new MSME clients get access to priority sector lending-compliant loans and build stronger portfolios, lenders said. “The benefit of such collaborations is that the exposure is on a stronger entity and banks get opportunity to build a relationship with both the large companies as well as MSMEs. Also, availability of more authentic data due to GST will enable banks to do better due-diligence and help give more credit to MSME,” said Ashok Kumar Garg, executive director at Bank of Baroda. The state-owned lender has tied up with all three TReDS exchanges licensed by the Reserve Bank of India in November 2015.There are around 30 million business establishments in India’s informal economy, with MSMEs having a 32% share, according to the government. The latest RBI data showed that loans to MSMEs (which are classified as priority sector loans), stood at Rs9.07 trillion as on 22 December 2017, up 10.6% from a year earlier.According to bankers, goods and service tax (GST) has brought many companies under the tax umbrella, making banks confident of lending to them.According to Sundeep Mohindru, founder of M1 Exchange, one of the three TReDS exchanges, since the bills are being paid basis the credit risk of large companies, the rate of discounting (or the margin charged by the lender) is around 8-10%. That is lower than the average 12% interest charged by banks to give collateral-based working capital loans.“In the December quarter, banks who had registered on the platform earlier exhausted their internal limit for a particular company and are raising the limits based on their experience. New lenders are quickly putting systems in place to discount bills and grow their books,” he said, adding that, so far, 15 banks and over 225 companies and MSMEs have registered on the exchange.Invoicemart is another bill discounting exchange run by A. TREDS Ltd, a joint venture between Axis Bank and e-commerce company Mjunction Services. It has registered 250 MSMEs, 27 large companies and eight financial institutions. Launched in July 2017, Invoicemart has discounted around 7,000 invoices worth Rs250 crore, Kalyan Basu, chief executive officer and managing director said. It aims to reach target of Rs11,000 crore in two years given the potential of the system.MSMEs are usually capital-starved because of limited access to bank credit. One of the key reasons is lack of documentation and skills to predict future cash flows, weak account maintenance, and non-compliance with taxation rules, bankers said. Additionally, demonetization had impacted their finances, which were already stretched because of delays in payments by large companies at least by over a quarter.Apart from TReDS, other announcements too are likely to boost credit demand to the sector. In his budget speech on 1 February, Union finance minister Arun Jaitley announced bringing on board more state-owned banks at TReDS platforms and linking them with the GST Network. This was in addition to the tax sops and credit support, capital and interest subsidy that were announced for MSMEs.Separately, RBI on 7 February gave additional time for loan repayment to certain MSMEs affected by GST, without getting their accounts classified as non-performing. This facility is available only to those firms whose aggregate loans are less than Rs25 crore.These steps may prompt more lenders to register themselves on these platforms.