A file photo of PepsiCo chairman and CEO Indra Nooyi. She says PepsiCo would continue to franchise its bottling operation to its local partners in countries including India. Photo: BloombergNew York: Global beverage major PepsiCo is seeing demand coming back in the Indian market post goods and services tax (GST) and the company has registered “very solid mid-single-digit growth” in the October-December quarter, its chairman and chief executive officer Indra Nooyi said.The beverages major would also continue to franchise its bottling operation to its local partners in countries including India, as per its strategy, Nooyi said in a post-earnings concall. “Post the GST, we are seeing the India market coming back,” she said.The New York-headquartered firm has witnessed organic revenue growth of 7% outside North America during the quarter, which was fuelled by continued strong performance in developing and emerging markets. This was “led by double-digit growth in Vietnam, Turkey, Thailand, Philippines and Argentina; high single-digit growth in Russia and China; and very solid mid-single-digit growth in Mexico and India,” said Nooyi.On being asked about franchising of its bottling operation globally to its partners such as Varun Beverages in India, she said:”I think internationally, when we find a very good bottler and we believe that they can run the business better than us, we will refranchise the business.”The company also said that it gained from an asset sale in India and refranchising in Jordan, which comes under its Asia, Middle East and North Africa (AMENA) division. “Positively impacted by the Jordan refranchising gain, productivity gains and a gain on an asset sale in India,” the company said in its earnings press statement. Pepsico’s AMENA division registered a revenue growth of 6 per cent in October-December quarter of 2017.
During the December quarter, both operating profit margins and net profit margins of the companies analysed by Mint were at a five-quarter high, even as raw material costs increased. Graphic: Paras Jain/MintMumbai: Corporate earnings showed the first signs of recovery in the December quarter as the negative effects of demonetisation and the subsequent goods and services tax (GST) implementation started to reverse, but analysts stopped short of calling it a full-blown turnaround.A Mint analysis of 2,040 listed companies showed that aggregate net profit, after adjusting for one-time gains and losses, rose 11.1% in the three months ended December, the highest in the past four quarters. This sample excludes banks, financial services firms and oil & gas companies.The earnings were a mixed bag with early signs of economic recovery, said Nischal Maheshwari, head, institutional equities, Edelweiss Securities Ltd.“Consumer staples and cement companies posted double-digit volume growth (on a very low base) after many quarters. Metals continued to post robust topline and profit growth. The key drivers for third-quarter earnings growth are base effects, fading disruptions from GST, demonetization, the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act and higher commodity prices. We think these should be the key factors going ahead as well,” said Maheshwari.During the quarter, both operating profit margins and net profit margins of these companies were at a five-quarter high, even as raw material costs increased. However, interest coverage ratio, which measures a firm’s ability to cover its interest costs, was at a 15-quarter high, rising to 3.47 times.Operating profit margin widened to 19.39% from 17.8% in the September quarter. Net profit margin expanded 1.63 percentage points to 7.12%.In the months ahead, rising Brent crude prices will impact profit margins, said analysts. This will be especially so for companies in the paint and aviation sector as oil accounts for a large portion of their expenditure. Brent crude is currently trading at $63.97 per barrel, an increase of 18% since the beginning of the financial year.“Below $64-65 per barrel is not a risk for corporates but subsequent rise from these levels may be a bigger threat when businesses may not be able to pass it on to consumers, which will hurt margins,”said P.V.K. Mohan, head of equities at Principal PNB Asset Management Co.Rising commodity prices, a sign of strengthening global growth, are another reason why analysts are wary of predicting a turnaround.“The business momentum is now getting back to its earlier pace, but higher energy and commodity prices have begun to bite domestic manufacturers, with companies reporting an increase in per unit cost of raw materials and energy,” said Deepak Jasani, head of retail research at HDFC Securities Ltd.Indeed, the recovery in corporate performance is not translating into a significant earnings upgrade. Bloomberg data shows Sensex companies’ consensus earnings per share forecast for the current fiscal have increased 0.9% since the beginning of the earnings season. For the next fiscal, they have gained just 0.2%.For the 30 members of the Sensex, adjusted net profit rose to a two-quarter high, rising 6.56% year-on-year. The Sensex currently trades at 18.09 times 12 months forward earnings, making it one of the most expensive benchmark gauges. Analysts said that markets valuations will appear reasonable once there is full recovery in earnings.“Market valuations are certainly high, but one should keep in mind that this is not an India-specific phenomenon. Across the globe, market valuations are elevated, perhaps a function of subdued earnings growth. As earnings growth improves, market valuations will normalize,” said Maheshwari.Still, analysts expect a full earnings recovery by the second half of the next financial year despite higher crude prices, citing a rebound in the economy.“We expect earnings recovery to be in place and take shape by fiscal 2019. Second half of FY18 is also signalling recovery in earnings. Key risks pertain to asset quality woes of public sector banks and uncertainty around provisioning requirement for the same,” said Gautam Duggad, head of research at Motilal Oswal Institutional Equities.In December, industrial production showed robust growth for the second straight month, growing at 7.1%, while retail inflation slowed to 5.07% in January, indicating that the economy may be stabilizing.Going ahead, the key challenge will be rise in input prices, though consumer demand is on an uptick, said Jasani. “As the economy recovers, we believe select mid-caps and small-caps will continue to show higher growth as the positive impact of better operating leverage and lower base effects continue,” Jasani added.
At present, there is no systematic tracking of float; however, estimates place this at over Rs1 trillion, i.e. Rs1 trillion of avoidable fiscal deficit. Photo: Hemant Mishra/MintThe government of India today spends around Rs3 trillion each year on centrally sponsored schemes. Though many explanations such as lack of political will, poor implementation capacity, etc. have been offered as reasons for poor outcomes, there is a larger structural issue: the government fund flow and payments architecture have got very little attention.The government’s current fund management system pushes funds down a hierarchical chain from the centre to the panchayat. Each level of government must first produce utilization certificates verifying that a majority of its previously disbursed funds have been used. When this is done, the level above the one requesting the funds releases a portion of the annual allocation down the chain. The effects of delayed fund transfers in one part of the chain therefore cascade through the entire system and in the process, amplify failure. For instance, if a district fails to receive its second instalment in time, all panchayats under it will be refused further instalments even though individually many of them may have fulfilled all eligibility conditions.This has led to the paradox of “unspent funds and unpaid dues”. According to an Accountability Initiative report on the National Health Mission (NHM), in 2015-16, only 68% of the total funds approved for NHM were actually spent. The story in India’s education sector is similar. A school-level expenditure-tracking exercise conducted in 300 schools across 10 districts in five states in December 2015 revealed that 31% of the schools were yet to receive their annual grants at the time of the survey, well into the academic year.Since funds are disbursed in bulk and in advance, unspent funds accrue in various government accounts. These idle funds, or float, put considerable strain on government finances. At present, there is no systematic tracking of float; however, estimates place this at over Rs1 trillion, i.e. Rs1 trillion of avoidable fiscal deficit.Ultimately, the burden is borne by beneficiaries who fail to receive entitlements on time, programme managers who spend a disproportionate amount of time chasing funds rather than ensuring implementation, government suppliers who cannot predict when their payments will come (and therefore increase prices) and contractual workers who do not know when they will receive payments. Interestingly, senior officers and staff ensure that their salaries are never delayed.The ministry of rural development, however, is an exception. In 2014-15, 70% of wages of MGNREGS (Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme) workers were delayed by over 15 days. Of these, 13% encountered a delay of over 90 days. Delays occurred even though various levels of central and state governments had parked unspent funds. In August 2015, the ministry took cabinet approval to introduce direct transfer of wages from the Consolidated Fund of India to the accounts of MGNREGS workers based on an electronic fund transfer order generated at the panchayat or block level.The cabinet proposal was informed by a 2012-13 study of MGNREGS in Bihar by MIT, Harvard and Oxford economists Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande and Clément Imbert affiliated to J-PAL, a global research network of professors from around the world. The study found that linking the flow of MGNREGS funds to actual expenditure and reducing the number of intermediaries in the payment structure brought down programme expenditure by 24% without compromising workers’ employment or wages. The authors attribute this to a reduction in corruption. The Bihar intervention, if scaled nationally, was estimated to save MGNREGS Rs5,744 crore in 2012-13.The August 2015 change in architecture of MGNREGS was possible because it had a complete transaction-based, workflow-driven IT platform. The data created by such a platform significantly reduces the burden that programme managers face in maintaining accounts and pursuing requests for funds. Very few schemes that use IT have these features. Most use computerized MIS (management information system) that are largely used for data upload. Though many schemes have transitioned to the Public Financial Management System, it functions largely as a payment gateway.Unclogging the government’s financial pipeline requires expanding workflow- driven IT platforms akin to MGNREGS for all central sector, centrally sponsored and state government schemes. At their ideal state, such platforms would automate payment, releasing money once all conditions precedent have been fulfilled, allowing programme managers to pull funds daily and directly from the Consolidated Fund of India and/or the State Consolidated Fund and pay directly to worker/beneficiary/vendor bank account. Criteria for payment eligibility would be precoded into the platform, thereby eliminating discretion on when funds are released.This would mean zero advance release, implying zero float. Since payments would be made in real time on a voucher-to-voucher basis, departments, auditors and the public will be able to track expenditure on a real-time basis.In 2010, the government of Mexico initiated a centralized e-payment system for federal salaries, pensions and social transfers, resulting in $1.27 billion in savings. The goods and services tax (GST) in India is achieving a similar feat. GST relies on the GST platform that was built by GST Network (GSTN), a not-for-profit section 8 company jointly owned by the centre, the states and financial institutions.If we can do it for taxes, we should do it for expenditure. Utilizing the expertise that GSTN has gained in rolling out GST may be our best bet. But for this to happen, the department of expenditure should task GSTN with the job of building a modular workflow driven-IT platform for the government. Individual government departments at the centre and states can then customize and use it in the same way that businesses customize and implement enterprise cloud and on-premise software from entities such as Oracle, Ramco or Microsoft.A. Santhosh Mathew is a former 1985 batch IAS officer from the Bihar cadre.